Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 




\ 






a 



\ A, 



« 



-,'^ " '; 



, .■<,• 



^ 



jFamon£( mamtn. 



GEORGE ELIOT. 



The next volumes in the Famous Women Series 

will be: 

Margaret Fuller. By Julia Ward Howe. 
Maria Edgeworth. By Miss Zinimern. 

Already published: 

George Eliot. By Miss Blind. 
Emily Bronte. By Miss Robinson. 
George Sand. By Miss Thomas. 
Mary Lamb. By Mrs. Gilchrist. 



V 



\ 




George- Eliot. 



MATHILDE BLIND. 



BOSTON; 

ROBERTS BROTHERS. 

18S3. 



Copyright^ 188S, 
By Roberts Brothers. 



Unzvxxsity Prbss: 
John Wilson akd Son, Cambridgb. 



> 






r 



PREFATORY NOTE. 



Detaile;d accounts of George Eliot's life 
have hitherto been singularly scanty. In the 
dearth of published materials a considerable 
portion of the information contained in this 
biographical study has, necessarily, been de- 
rived from private sources. In visiting the 
places connected with George Eliot's early 
life, I enjoyed the privilege of meeting her 
brother, Mr. Isaac Evans, and was also fortu- 
nate in gleaning many a characteristic fact 
f and trait from old people in the neighborhood, 

contemporaries of her father, Mr. Robert 
Evans. For valuable help in forming an idea 
of the growth of George Eliot's mind, my 
warm thanks are especially due to her oldest 
friends, Mr. and Mrs. Charles Bray, and Miss 
Hennell of Coventry. Miss Jenkins, the nov- 
elist's schoolfellow, and Mrs. John Cash, also 



i 



vi PREFATORY NOTE. 

generously afforded me every assistance in 
their power. 

A great part of the correspondence in the 
present volume has not hitherto appeared in 
print, and has been kindly placed at my dis- 
posal by Mrs. Bray, Mrs. Gilchrist, Mrs. Clif- 
ford, Miss Marks, Mr. William M. Rossetti, 
and the late James Thomson. I have also 
quoted from letters addressed to Miss Phelps 
which were published in Harpet^s Magazine 
of March 1882, and from one or two other 
articles that have appeared in periodical pub- 
lications. For permission to make use of 
this correspondence my thanks are due to 
Mr. C. L. Lewes. 

By far the most exhaustive published ac- 
count of George Eliot's life and writings, 
and the one of which I have most freely 
availed myself, is Mr. Call's admirable essay 
in the Westminster Review of July 1881. 
Although this, as indeed every other article 
on the subject, states George Eliot's birth- 
place incorrectly, it contains many important 
data not mentioned elsewhere. To the article 
on George Eliot in Blackwood's Magazine 
for February 1881, I owe many interesting 
particulars, chiefly connected with the be- 



PRE FA TOR Y NO TE, yii 

ginning of George Eliot's literary career. 
Amongst other papers consulted may be men- 
tioned a noticeable one by Miss Simcox in the 
Contemporary Review, and an appreciative 
notice by Mr. Frederick Myers in Scribner's 
Magazine^ as well as articles in Harper's 
Magazine of May 1881, and The Century of 
August 1882. Two quaint little pamphlets, 
' Seth Bede : the Methody/ and ' George Eliot 
in Derbyshire/ by Guy Roslyn, although full 
of inaccuracies, have also furnished some 
curious items of information. 

Mathilde Blind, 



CONTENTS. 

I 

Chapter Page 

I. Introductory i 

11. Childhood and Early Home 12 

III, Youthful Studies and Friendships . . 29 

IV. Translation of Strauss and Feuerbach. 

— Tour on the Continent .... 58 

V. The * Westminster Review ' 78 

VI. George Henry Lewes 103 

VII. Scenes of Clerical Life 121 

VIII. Adam Bede 140 

IX. The Mill on the Floss ....... 163 

X. Silas Marner i81[ 

XI. RoMOLA 196 

XII. Her Poems 213 

XIII. Felix Holt and Middlemarch . . . • 232 

XIV. Daniel Deronda 254 

XV. Last Years 271 



GEORGE ELIOT. 



CHAPTER I. 



INTRODUCTORY. 



Speaking of the contributions made to lit- 
erature by her own sex, George Eliot, in a 
charming essay written in 1854, awards the 
palm of intellectual pre-eminence to the women 
of France. "They alone," says the great 
English author, "have had a vital influence 
on the development of literature. For in 
France alone the mind of woman has passed, 
like an electric current, through the language, 
making crisp and definite what is elsewhere 
heavy and blurred ; in France alone, if the 
writings of women were swept away, a serious 
gap would be made in the national history." 

The reason assigned by George Eliot for 
this literary superiority of Frenchwomen con- 
sists in their having had the courage of their 
sex. They thought and felt as women, and 
when they wrote, their books becanie the full- 



2 GEORGE ELIOT, 

est expression of their womanhood. And by 
being true to themselves, by only seeking 
inspiration from their own life-experience, 
instead of servilely copying that of men, their 
letters and memoirs, their novels and pictures, 
have a distinct, nay unique, value for the stu- 
dent of art and literature. Englishwomen, on 
the other hand, have not followed the sponta- 
neous impulses of nature. They have not 
allowed free play to the peculiarly feminine 
element, preferring to mould their intellectual 
products on the masculine pattern. For that 
reason, says George Eliot, their writings are 
" usually an .absurd exaggeration of the mas- 
culine style, like the swaggering gait of a bad 
actress in male attire." 

This novel theory, concerning a specifi- 
cally feminine manifestation of the intellect, 
is doubly curious when one compares it with 
Madame de Stael's famous saying, " Le ginie 
fia pas de sexe^ But an aphorism, however 
brilliant, usually contains only one half the 
truth, and there is every reason to think that 
women have already, and will much more 
largely, by-and-by, infuse into their works cer- 
tain intellectual and emotional qualities which 
are essentially their own. Shall we, however, 
admit George Eliot's conclusion that French- 
women alone have hitherto shown any of this 



INTRODUCTORY. 3 

original bias? Several causes are mentioned 
by her in explanation of this exceptional merit. 
Among these causes there is one which would 
probably occur to every one who began to 
reflect on this subject. The influence of the 
" Salon " in developing and stimulating the 
finest feminine talents has long been recog. 
nized. In this school for women the gift of 
expression was carried to the utmost pitch 
of perfection. By their active co-operation 
in the discussion of the most vital subjects, 
thought became clear, luminous, and forcible ; 
sentiment gained indescribable graces of re- 
finement ; and wit, with its brightest scintilla- 
tions, lit up the sombre background of life. 

But among other causes enumerated as 
accounting for that more spontaneous pro- 
ductivity of Frenchwomen, attributed to them 
by George Eliot, there is one which would 
probably have occurred to no other mind 
than hers, and which is too characteristic of 
her early scientific tendencies to be omitted. 
For according to her, the present superiority 
of Frenchwomen is mainly due to certain 
physiological peculiarities of the Gallic race. 
Namely, to the "small brain and vivacious 
temperament which permit the fragile system 
of woman to sustain the superlative activity 
requisite for intellectual creativeness," whereas 



4 GEORGE ELIOT. 

"the larger brain and slower temperament of 
the English and Germans are in the womanly 
organization generally dreamy and passive. 
So that the physique of a woman may suffice 
as the substratum for a superior Gallic mind, 
but is too thin a soil for a superior Teutonic 
one." 

So knotty and subtle a problem must be 
left to the scientist of the future to decide. 
Perhaps some promising young physiologist, 
profiting by the " George Henry Lewes Stu- 
dentship" founded by George Eliot, may 
some day satisfactorily elucidate this question. 
In the meanwhile it is at least gratifying to 
reflect that she does not deny the future 
possibilities of even English and German 
women. She admits that conditions might 
arise which in their case also would be favor- 
able to the highest creative effort ; conditions 
which would modify the existing state of 
things according to which, to speak in her 
own scientific phraseology : " The woman of 
large capacity can seldom rise beyond the 
absorption of ideas ; her physical conditions 
refuse to support the energy required for 
spontaneous activity ; the voltaic pile is not 
strong enough to produce crystallizations." 

But was the author of 'Adam Bede' not 
herself destined to be a triumphant refuta- 



INTRODUCTORY, 5 

tion of her theory ? Or had those more 
favorable circumstances mentioned as vague 
possibilities already arisen in her case ? Not 
that we believe, for that matter, in the supe- 
rior claims of illustrious Frenchwomen It is 
true George Eliot enumerates a formidable 
list of names. But on the whole we may 
boast of feminine celebrities that need not 
shrink from the comparison. 

There is, of course, much truth in the 
great Efnglishwoman's generous praise of her 
French compeers. "Mme. de S6vign6 re- 
mains," she says, "the single instance of a 
woman who is supreme in a class of literature 
which has engaged the ambition of men ; 
Mme. Dacier still reigns the queen of blue- 
stockings, though women have long studied 
Greek without shame ; Mme. de Stael's name 
still rises to the lips when we are asked to 
mention a woman of great intellectual power ; 
Mme. Roland is still the unrivalled type of 
the sagacious and sternly heroic yet lovable 
woman ; George Sand is the unapproached 
artist who, to Jean Jacques' eloquence and 
deep sense of external nature, unites the 
clear delineation of character and the tragic 
depth of passion." 

Shall we be forced to admit that the repre- 
sentative women of England cannot justly be 



6 GEORGE ELIOT. 

placed on as high a level ? Is it so certain 
that they, too, did not speak out of the ful- 
ness of their womanly natures ? That they, 
too, did not feel the genuine need to express 
modes of thought and feeling peculiar to 
themselves, which men, if at all, had but 
inadequately expressed hitherto ? 

Was not Queen Elizabeth the best type of 
a female ruler, one whose keen penetration 
enabled her to choose her ministers with 
infallible judgment ? Did not Fanny Bumey 
distil the delicate aroma of girlhood in one 
of the most delightful of novels ? Or what 
of Jane Austen, whose microscopic fidelity of 
observation has a well-nigh scientific accu- 
racy, never equalled unless in the pages of 
the author 'we are writing of? Sir Walter 
Scott apparently recognized the eminently 
feminine inspiration of her writings, as he 
says : " That young lady had a talent for 
describing the involvements, and ^ feelings, 
and characters of ordinary life, which is for 
me the most wonderful I ever met with. ^ The 
Bow-wow strain I can do myself like any 
now agoing ; but the exquisite touch, which 
renders ordinary commonplace things and 
characters interesting from the truth of the 
descriptions and the sentiment, is denied to 
me." Then turning to the Brontes, does not 



INTRODUCTORY. 




light, which leaves no room for illusion, but 
reveals all nature with uncompromising di- 
rectness. The, one has more of that primi- 
tive imagination which seizes on the elemental 
side of life — on the spectacle of the starry . 
heavens or of Alpine solitudes, on the insur- 
rectioQ and tumult of human passion, on the 
shocks of revolution convulsing the social 
order — while the other possesses, in a higher 
degree, the acute intellectual perception for 
the orderly sequence of life, for that un- 
changeable round of toil which is the lot of 
the mass of men, and for the earth in its 
homelier aspects as it tells on our daily exist- 
ence. In George Sand's finest work there is 
a sweet spontaneity, almost as if she were an 
oracle of Nature uttering automatically the 
divine message. But, on the other hand, 
when the inspiration forsakes her, she drifts 
along on a windy current of words, the'fatal 
facility^ of her pen often beguiling the writer 
into vague diffuseness and unsubstantial dec- 
lamation. 

In this respect, also, our English novelist 
is the opposite of George Sand, for George 
Eliot invariably remains the master of her 
genius : indeed, she thoroughly fulfils Goethe's 
demand that if you set up for an artist you 
must command art. This intellectual self- 



\ 



lO GEORGE ELIOT, 

restraint never forsakes George Eliot, who 
always selects hef^ means with a thorough 
knowledge of the ends to be attained. The 
radical difference in the genius of these two 
writers, to both of whom applies Mrs. Brown' 
ing's apt appellation of '* large-brained woman 
and large-hearted man," extends naturally to 
their whole tone of thought. George Sand 
is impassioned, turbulent, revolutionary, the 
spiritual daughter of Rousseau, with an enthu- 
siastic faith in man's future destiny. George 
Eliot, contemplative, observant, instinctively 
conservative, her imagination dearly loving to 
do " a little Toryism on the sly,*' is as yet the 
sole outcome of the modern positive spirit in 
imaginative literature — the sole novelist who 
has incorporated in an artistic form some of 
the leading ideas of Comte, of Mazzini, and 
of Darwin. In fact, underlying all her art 
there is the same rigorous teaching of the 
inexorable laws which govern the life of man. 
The teaching that not liberty but duty is the 
condition of existence ; -the teaching of the 
incalculable effects of hereditary transmission 
with the solemn responsibilities it involves ; 
the teaching of the inherent sadness and im- 
perfection in human nature, which render 
resignation the first virtue of man. 

In fact, as a moral influence, George Eliot 



.< 



INTRO D UCTOR K 1 1 

cannot so much be compared, with George 
Sand, or with any other novelist of her gen- 
eration, as with Carlyle. She had, indeed, a 
far more explicit ethical code to offer than 
the author of ' Sartor Resartus/ For though 
>o the immense force of the latter's personality, 
, glowing through his writings, had a tonic 
effect in promoting a healthy moral tone, 
there was little of positive moral truth to be 
gathered from them. ( But the lessons which 
George Eliot would fain teach to men were 
most unmistakable in their bearing — the 
lessons of pitying Ipve towards fellow-men ; 
of sympathy with all human suffering ; of 
unwaveringX faithfulness towards the social 
bond, consisting in the claims of race, of 
country, of family ; of unflagging aspiration 
after that life which is most beneficent to the 
community, that life, in short, towards which 
she herself aspired in the now famous prayer 
to reach 

** That purest heaven, be to other souls 

The cup of strength in some great agony, 
. Enkindle generous ardor, feed pure love, 
Beget the smiles that have no cruelty — 
Be the sweet presence of a good diffused, 
And in diffusion ever more intense." 



CHAPTER II. 

CHILDHOOD AND EARLY HOME. 

Mary Ann Evans, better known as " George 
Eliot/* was bom on November 22nd, 18 19, 
at South Farm, a mile from Griff, in the par- 
ish of Colton, in Warwickshire. Both the 
date and place of her birth have been in- 
correctly stated, hitherto, in the notices of 
her life. The family moved to Griff House 
in March of the following year, wheii she was 
only six months old. Her father, Robert 
Evans, of Welsh origin, was a Staffordshire 
man from EUaston, near Ashbourne, and be^ 
gan life as a carpenter. In the kitchen at 
Griff House may still be seen a beautifully 
fashioned oaken press, a sample of his work- 
manship. A portrait of him, also preserved 
there, is known among the family as " Adam 
Bede." It is not as good a likeness as that 
of a certain carefully painted miniature, the 
features of which bear an unmistakable re- 
semblance to those of the daughter destined 
to immortalize his name. A strongly marked, 



CHILDHOOD AND EARLY HOME, 



13 



W 



7 
f/ 



yet handsome face, massive in structure, and 
with brown eyes, whose shrewd, penetrating 
glance is particularly noticeable, betoken the 
man of strong practical intelligence, of rare 
energy and endurance. His career and char- 
acter are partially depicted in Adam Bede, 
Caleb Garth, and Mr. Hackit — portraitures 
in which the different stages of his life are 
recorded with a mingling of fact and fiction. 
A shadowing forth of the same nature is dis- 
cernible in the devotion of Stradivarius to his 
noble craft ; and even in the tender paternity 
of Mr. Tulliver there are indications of an- 
other phase of the same individuality. 

Like Adam Bede, Mr. Evans from carpen- 
ter rose to be forester, and from forester to 
be land-agent. It was in the latter capacity 
alone that he was ever known in Warwick- 
shire? At one time he was surveyor to five 
estates in the midland counties — those of 
Lord Aylesford,' Lord Lifford, Mr. Bromley 
Davenport, Mrs. Gregory, and Sir Roger 
Newdigate. The last was his principal em- 
ployer. Having early discerned the excep- 
tional capacity of the man. Sir Roger induced 
him to settle in Warwickshire, and take charge 
of his estates. Sir Roger's seat, Arbury Hall, 
is the original of the charming description of 
Cheverel Manor in ' Mr. Gilfil's Love Story.' 



14 GEORGE EUOT, 

It is said that Mr. Evans's trustworthiness 
had become proverbial in the county. But 
while faithfully serving his employers he also 
enjoyed great popularity among their tenants. 
He was gentle, but of indomitable firmness ; 
and while stern to the idle and unthrifty, he 
did not press heavily on those who might be 
behindhand with their rent, owing to ill-luck 
or misfortune, on quarter days. 

Mr. Evans was twice married. He had lost 
his first wife, by whom he had a son and a 
daughter, before settling in Warwickshire. Of 
his second wife, whose maiden name was Pear- 
son, very little is known. She must, therefore, 
according to Schiller, have been a pattern of 
womanhood ; for he says that the best women, 
like the best ruled states, have no history. 
We have it on very good authority, however, 
that Mrs. Hackit, in 'Amos Barton,' is a 
faithful likeness of George Eliot's mother. 
This may seem startling at first, but, on re- 
flection, she is the woman one might have 
expected, being a strongly marked figure, 
with a heart as tender as her tongvie is sharp. 
She is described as a thin woman, with a 
chronic liver-complaint, of indefatigable in- 
dustry and epigrammatic speech ; who, " in 
the utmost enjoyment of spoiling a friend's 
self-satisfaction, was never known to spoil a 



V '' 



V 



CHILDHOOD AND EARLY HOME, 15 

Stocking." A notable housewife, whose clock- 
work regularity in all domestic affairs was 
such that all her farm-work was done by nine 
o'clock in the morning, when she would sit 
down to her loom. " In the same spirit, she 
brought out her furs on the first of November, 
whatever might be the temperature'. She was 
not a woman weakly to accommodate hersMf 
to shilly-shally proceedings. If the season 
did n't know what it ought to do, Mrs. Hackit 
did. In her best days it was always sharp 
weather at ' Gunpowder Plot,' and she did n't 
like new fashions." Keenly observant and 
quick of temper, she was yet full of good 
nature, her sympathy showing itself in the 
active helpfulness with which she came to the 
assistance of poor Milly Barton, and the love 
she showed to her children, who, however, 
declined kissing her. 

Is there not a strong family resemblance 
between this character and Mrs. Poysen that 
masterpiece of George Eliot's art } (Mary 
Ann's gift of (pointed speech J was therefore 
' mother- wit, in the true sense, and her rich 
J humor and marvellous powers of observa- 
tion^ were derived from the same side, /while 
her conscientiousness, her capacity, ana that 
faculty of taking pains, which i*- so large a 
factor in the development of genius, came 
more directly from the father. \ 



I6 GEORGE ELIOT. 

Mr. Evans had three children by his second 
wife, Christiana, Isaac, and Mary Ann. " It 
is interesting, I think," writes George Eliot, 
in reply to some questions of an American 
lady, "to know whether a writer was born 
in a central or border district — a condition 
which always has a strongly determining in- 
flCience. I was born in Warwickshire, but 
certain family traditions connected" with more 
northerly districts made these districts a re- 
gion of poetry to me in my early childhood." 
In the autobiographical sonnets, entitled 
' Brother and Sister/ we catch a glimpse of 
the mother preparing her children for their 
accustomed ramble, by stroking down the 
tippet and setting the frill in order ; then 
standing on the door-step to follow their les- 
sening figures " with the benediction of her 
gaze.'* Mrs. Evans was aware, to a certain 
extent, of her daughter's unusual capacity, 
being anxious not only that she should have 
the best education attainable in the neighbor- 
hood, but also that good moral influences 
should be brought to bear upon her : still, the 
girl's constant habit of reading, even in bed, 
caused the practical mother not a little an- 
noyance. 

The house, where the family lived at that 
time, and in which the first twenty years of 



f 



CHILDHOOD AND EARLY HOME. 17 

Mary Ann Evans's life were spent, is sit- 
uated in a rich verdant landscape, where the 
" grassy fields, each with a sort of personality 
given to it by. the capricious hedge-rows,'f 
blend harmoniously with the red-roofed cot-, 
tages scattered in a happy haphazard fashion 
amid orchards and elder-bushes. Sixty years 
ago the country was much more thickly 
wooded than now, and from the windows of 
GrifE House might be seen the oaks and elms 
that had still survived from Shakespeare's 
forest of Arden. The house of the Evans 
family, half manor-house, half farm, was an 
old-fashioned building, two stories high, with 
red brick walls thickly covered with ivy. 
Like the Garths, they were probably "very 
fond of their old house." A lawn, inter- 
spersed with trees, stretched in front towards 
the gate, flanked by two stately Norway firs, 
while a sombre old yew almost touched some 
of the upper windows with its wide-spreading 
branches. A farm -yard was at the back, with 
low rambling sheds and stables ; and beyond 
that, bounded by quiet meadows, one may 
still see the identical " leafy, flowery, bushy " 
garden, which George Eliot so often delighted 
in describing, at a time when her early life, 
with all its tenderly hoarded associations, had 
become to her but a haunting memory of by- 



1 8 GEORGE ELIOT. 

gone things. A garden where roses and cab- 
bages jostle each other, where vegetables have 
to make room for gnarled old apple-trees, and 
where, amid the raspberry bushes and row of 
currant trees, you expect to come upon Hetty 
herself, " stooping to gather the low-hanging 
fruit." 

Such was the place where the childhood of 
George Eliot was spent. Here she drew in 
those impressions of English rural and pro- 
; vincial life, of which one day she was to be- 
\ come the greatest interpreter. Impossible to 
be in a better position for seeing life. Not 
only was her father's position always im- 
proving, so that she was early brought in 
contact with different grades of society, but 
his calling made him more or less acquainted 
with all ranks of his neighbors, and, says 
George Eliot, " I have always thought that 
the most fortunate Britons are those whose 
experience has given them a practical share 
in many aspects of the national lot, who 
have lived long among the mixed commonalty, 
roughing it with them under difficulties, 
knowing how their food tastes to them, and 
getting acquainted with their notions and mo- 
tives, not by inference from traditional types 
in literature, or from philosophical theories, 
but from daily fellowship and observation." 



CHILDHOOD AND EARLY HOME. 19 

And what kind of a child was it who loi- 
tered about the farm-yard and garden and 
fields, noticing everything with grave, watch- 
ful eyes, and storing it in a memory of extraor- 
dinary tenacity? One of her schoolfellows, 
who knew her at the age of thirteen, con- 
fessed to me that it was impossible to imagine 
George Eliot as a baby ; that it seemed as 
if she must have come into the world fully 
developed, like a second Minerva. Her feat- 
ures were fully formed at a very early age, 
and she had a seriousness of expression almost 
startling for her years. The records of her 
child-life may be deciphered, amid some ro- 
mantic alterations, in the early history of Tom 
and Maggie TuUiver. Isaac and Mary Ann * 
Evans were playmates, like these, the latter 
having all the tastes of a boy ; whereas her 
sister Chrissy, said to be the original of Lucy 
Deane, had peculiarly dainty feminine ways, 
and shrank from out-door rambles for fear of 
soiling her shoes or pinafore. But Mary Ann 
and her brother went fishing together, or 
spinning tops, or digging for earth-nuts ; and 
the twice-told incident of the little girl being 
left to mind the rod and losing herself in 
dreamy contemplation, oblivious of her task, 
is evidently taken from life, and may be quoted 
as a reminiscence of her own childhood : — 




26 GEORGE ELIOT. 

" One day my brother left me in high charge 
To mind the rod, while he went seeking bait, 
And bade me, when I saw a Hearing barge, 

Snatch out the line, lest he should come too late. 

" Proud of the task I watched with all my might 
For one whole minute, till my eyes grew wide, 
Till sky and earth took on a new, strange light. 
And seemed a dream-world floating on some tide. 

" A fair pavilioned boat for me alone, 
Bearing me onward through the vast unknown. 

** But sudden came the barge's pitch-black prow, 
Nearer and angrier came my brother's cry. 
And all my soul was quivering fear, when lo I 
Upon the imperilled line, suspended high, 

" A silver perch I My guilt that won the prey 
Now turned to merit, had a guerdon rich 
Of hugs and praises, and made merry play 
Until my triumph reached its highest pitch 

** When all at home were told the wondrous feat, 
And how the little sister had fished well. 
Ill secret, though my fortune tasted sweet, 
I wondered why this happiness befell. 

" * The little lass had luck,' the gardener said ; 
And so I learned, luck was to glory wed." 

Unlike Maggie, however, little Mary Ann 
was as good a hand at fishing as her brother, 
only differing from him in not liking to put 
the worms on the hooks. 

Another incident taken from real life, if 
somewhat magnified; is the adventure with 



CHILDHOOD AND EARLY HOME. 2 1 

the gypsies. For the prototype of Maggie 
also fell among these marauding vagrants, 
and was detained a little time among them. 
Whether she also proposed to instruct the 
gypsies and to gain great influence over them 
by teaching them something about " geogra- 
phy" and " Columbus/' does not transpire. 
But, indeed, most of Maggie's early experi- 
ences are autobiographic, down to such facts 
as her father telling her to rub her " turnip " 
cheeks against Sally's to get a little bloom, 
and to cutting ofE one side of her hair in a 
passion. At a very early age Mary Ann and 
her brother were sent to the village free 
school at Colton, in th« parish of Griff, a 
not unusual custom in those days, when the 
means of tuition for little children were much 
more difficult to procure than now. There 
are still old men living who used to sit on 
the same form with little Mary Ann Evans 
learning her A, B, C, and a certain William 
Jacques (the original of the delightfully comic 
Bob Jakins of fiction) remembers carrying her 
pick-a-back on the lawn in front of her 
father's house. • 

As the brother and sister grew older they 
saw less of each other, Mary Ann being sent 
to a school at Nuneaton, kept by Miss Lewis, 
for whom she retained an affectionate regard 



22 GEORGE EUOT, 

long years afterwards. About the same time 
she taught at a Sunday-school, in a little cot- 
tage adjoining her father's house. When she 
was twelve years old, being then, in the words 
of a neighbor, who occasionally called at Griff 
House, "a q^ueer, three-cornered, awkward 
girl,'* who sat in corners and shyly watched 
her elders, she was placed as boarder with the 
Misses* Franklin at Coventry. This school, 
then in high repute throughout the neighbor- 
hood, was kept by two sisters, of whom the 
younger. Miss Rebecca Franklin, was a wo- 
man of unusual attainments and ladylike cul- 
ture, although not without a certain taint of 
Johnsonian affectation. She seems to have 
/ thoil3ughly grounded Miss Evans in a sound 
/ English education, laying great stress in par- 
ticular on the propriety of a precise and care- 
ful manner of speaking and reading. She 
herself always made a point of expressing 
herself in studied sentences, and on one oc- 
casion, when a friend had called to ask after 
a dying relative, she actually kept the servant 
waiting till she had framed an appropriately 
worded message.* Miss Evans, in whose family 
a broad provincial dialect was spoken, soon 
acquired Miss Rebecca's carefully elaborated 
speech, and, not content with that, she might 
be said to have created a new voice for her- 



CHILDHOOD AND EARLY HOME. 



23 



self. In later life every one who knew her 
was struck by the sweetness of her voice, and 
the finished construction of every sentence, 
as it fell from her lips ; for by that time the 
acquired habit had become second nature, and 
blended harmoniously with her entire person- 
ality. But in those early days the artificial 
effort at perfect propriety of expression was 
still perceptible, and produced an impression 
of affectation, perhaps reflecting that of her 
revered instructress. It is also believed that 
some of the beauty of her inton^.tion in read- 
ing English poetry was owing to the same 
early influence. 

Mary Ann, or Marian as she came after- 
wards to be called, remained about three years 
with the Misses Franklin. She stood aloof 
from the other pupils, and one of her school- 
fellows. Miss Bradley Jenkins, says that she 
was quite as remarkable in those early days 
as after she had acquired fame. She seems 
to have strangely impressed the imagination 
of the latter, who, figuratively speaking, 
looked up at her " as at a mountain." There 
was never anything of the schoolgirl about 
Miss Evans, for, even at that early age, she 
had the manners and appearance of a grave, 
staid woman ; so much so, that a stranger, 
happening to call one day, mistook this girl 



24 



GEORGE EUOT. 



of thirteen for one of the Misses Franklin, 
who were then middle-aged women. In this, 
also, there is a certain resemblance to Maggie 
TuUiver, who, at the age of thirteen, is de- 
scribed as looking already like a woman. 
English composition, French and German, 
were some of the studies to which much 
time and attention were devoted. Being 
greatly in advance of the other pupils in the 
knowledge of French, Miss Evans and Miss 
Jenkins were taken out of the general class 
and set to study it together ; but, though the 
two girls were thus associated in a closer 
fellowship, no real intimacy apparently fol- 
lowed from it. The latter watched the future 
" George Eliot " with intense interest, but al- 
ways felt as if in the presence of a superior, 
though socially their positions were much on 
a par. This haunting sense of superiority 
precluded the growth of any closer friendship 
between the two fellow-pupils. All the more 
startling was it to the admiring schoolgirl, 
when one day, on using Marian Evans's Ger- 
man dictionary, she saw scribbled on its blank 
page some verses, evidently original, express- 
ing rather sentimentally a yearning for love 
and sympathy. Under this granite-like ex- 
terior, then, there was beating a heart that 
passionately craved for human tenderness and 
companionship ! 



CHILDHOOD AND EARLY HOME, 



25 



Inner solitude was no doubt the portion 
of George Eliot in those days. She must 
already have had a dim consciou^ess of un- 
usual power, to a great extent isolating her 
from the girls of her own age, absorbed as 
they were in quite other feelings and ideas. 
Strong religious convictions pervadiBci her life 
at this period, and in the fervid fditH and 
spiritual exaltation which characterize Mag- 
gie's girlhood, we have a very faithful picture 
of the future novelist's own state of mind. 
Passing through many stages of religious 
thought, she was first simple Church of 
England, then Low Church, then " Anti- 
Supernatural." In this latter character she 
wore an *' Anti-Supernatural " cap, in which, 
so says an early friend, " her plain features 
looked all the plainer." But her nature was 
a mixed one, as indeed is Maggie's too, and 
conflicting tendencies and inclinations pulled 
her,* no doubt, in different directions. The 
self-renouncing impulses of one moment were 
checkmated at another by in eager desire for 
approbation and distinguishing pre-eminence ; 
and a piety verging on asceticism did not ex- 
clude, on the other hand, a very clear per- 
ception of the advantages and desirability of 
good birth, wealth, and high social position. 
Like her own charming Esther in ' Felix 



26 GEORGE ELIOT, 

Holt/ she had a fine sense, amid somewhat 
anomalous surroundings, of the highest re- 
finements and delicacies which are supposed 
to be the natural attributes of people of rank 
and fashion. She even shared with the above- 
mentioned heroine certain girlish vanities and 
weaknesses, such as liking to have all things 
about her person as elegant as possible. 

About the age of fifteen Marian Evans left 
the Misses Franklin, and soon afterwards she 
had the misfortune of losing her mother, who 
died in her forty-ninth year. Writing to a 
friend in afjter life she says, " I began at six- 
teen to be acquainted with the unspeakable 
grief of a last parting, in the death of my 
mother." Less sorrowful partings ensued, 
though in the end they proved almost as 
irrevocable. Her elder sister, and the brother 
in whose steps she had once followed " puppy- 
like," married and settled in homes of their 
own. Their different lots in life, and the far 
more pronounced differences of their aims 
and ideas, afterwards divided the "brother 
and sister" completely. This kind of separa- 
tion between people who have been friends in 
youth is often more terrible to endure than 
the actual loss by death itself, and doth truly 
"work like madness in the brain." Is there not 
some reference to this in that pathetic passage 



k 



CHILDHOOD AND EARLY HOME. 27 

in 'Adam Bede : ' " Family likeness has often 
a deep sadness in it. Natyre, that great tragic 
dramatist, knits us together by bone and 
muscle, and divides us by the subtler web of 
our brains, blends yearning and repulsion, and 
ties us by our heartstrings to the beings that 
jar us at every movement ... we see eyes 

— ah ! so like our mother's, averted from us 
in cold alienation." 

For some years after this Miss Evans and 
her father remained alone together at Griff 
House. He offered to get a housekeeper, as 
not the house only, but farm matters, had to 
be looked after, and he was always tenderly 
considerate of " the little wench," as he called 
her. But his daughter preferred taking the 
whole management of the place into her own 
hands, and she was as conscientious and dili- 
gent in the discharge of her domestic duties 
as in the prosecution of the studies she carried 
on at the same time. One of her chief beauties 
was in her large, finely shaped, feminine hands 

— hands which she has, indeed, described as 
characteristic of several of her heroines ; but 
she once pointed out to a friend at Foleshill 
that one of them was broader across than the 
other, saying, with some pride, that it was 
due to the quantity of butter and cheese she 
had made during her housekeeping days at 



28 GEORGE ELIOT. 

Griff. It will be remembered that this is 
a characteristic attributed to the exemplary 
Nancy Lammeter, whose person gave one 
the idea of " perfect, unvarying neatness, as 
the body of a little bird," only her" hands 
bearing " the traces of butter-making, cheese- 
crushing, and even still coarser work." Cer- 
tainly the description of the dairy in 'Adam 
Bede,' and all the processes of butter-making, 
is one which only complete knowledge could 
have rendered so perfect. Perhaps no scene 
in all her novels stands out with more life- 
like vividness than that dairy which one could - 
have sickened for in hot, dusty streets : 
" Such coolness, such purity, such fresh fra- 
grance of new-pressed cheese, of firm butter, 
of wooden vessels perpetually bathed in pure 
water ; such soft coloring of red earthenware 
and creamy surfaces, brown wood and polished 
tin, gray limestone and rich orange-red rust 
on the iron weights and hooks and hinges." 

This life of mixed practical activity and in- 
tellectual pursuits came to an end in 1841, 
when Mr. Evans relinquished Griff House, 
and the management of Sir Roger Newdi- 
gate*s estates, to his married son, and re- 
moved with his daughter to Foleshill, near 
Coventry. 



\ 



CHAPTER III. 

YOUTHFUL STUDIES AND FRIENDSHIPS. 

The period from about twenty to thirty is 
usually the most momentous in the lives of 
illustrious men and women. It is true that 
the most abiding impressions, those which 
the future author will reproduce most vividly, 
have been absorbed by the growing brain pre- 
vious to this age ; but the fusion of these 
varied impressions of the outward world with 
the inner life, and the endless combinations 
in which imagination delights, rarely begin 
before. Then, as a rule, the ideas are en- 
gendered to be carried out in the maturity of 
life. Alfred de Vigny says truly enough : 

" Qu'est-ce qu*une grande vie ? 
Une pens^e de la jeunesse, ex^cut^e par I'dge mur." 

Moreover, it is a revolutionary age. In- 
herited opinions that had been accept-ed, as 
the rotation of the seasons, with unhesitating 
acquiescence, become an object of speculation 
and passionate questioning. Nothing is taken 



\ 



30 



GEORGE ELIOT. 



upon trust. The intellect, stimulated by the 
sense of expanding and hitherto unchecked 
capacity, delights in exercising its strength 
by critically passing in review the opinions, 
laws, institutions commonly accepted as un- 
alterable. And if the intellect is thus active 
the heart is still more so. This is emphati- 
cally the time of enthusiastic friendship and 
glowing love, if often also of cruel disenchant- 
ment and disillusion. In most biographies, 
therefore, this phase of life is no less fasci- 
nating than instructive. For it shows the in- 
dividual while still in a stage of growth already 
reacting on his environment, and becoming a 
motive power according to the measure of his 
intellectual and moral endowments. 

It is on this state of George Eliot's life that 
we are now entering. At Foleshill she ac- 
quired that vast range of knowledge and 
universality of culture which so eminently 
distinguished her. 

The house she now inhabited, though not 
nearly as picturesque or substantial as the 
former home of the Evanses, was yet suffi- 
ciently spacious, with a pleasant garden in 
front and behind it ; the latter, Marian Evans 
was fond of making as much like the delicious 
garden of her childhood as was possible under 
the circumstances. In other respects she 



YOUTHFUL STUDIES, ETC. 31 

greatly altered her ways of life, cultivating 
an ultra-fastidiousness in her manners and 
household arrangements. Though so young, 
she was not only entire mistress of her father's 
establishment, but, as his business required 
him to be abroad the greater part of each 
week, she was mostly alone. 

Her life now became more and more that 
of a student, one of her chief reasons for re- 
joicing at the change of residence being the 
freer access to books. She had, however, 
already amassed quite a library of her own by 
this time. In addition to her private studies, 
she was now also able to have masters to in- 
struct her in a variety of subjects. The Rev. 
T. Sheepshanks, head master of the Coventry 
Grammar-school, gave her lessons in Greek 
and Latin, as she particularly wished to learn 
the former language in order to read ^s- 
chylus. She continued her study of French, 
German, and Italian under the tuition of 
Signor Breizzi, even acquiring some knowl- 
edge of Hebrew by her own unassisted ef- 
forts. Mr. Simms, the veteran organist of 
St. Michael's, Coventry, instructed her in the 
'pianoforte ; and probably Rosamond Vincy's 
teacher in * Middlemarch ' is a faithful por- 
traiture of him. " Her master at Mrs. Lem- 
on's school (close to a country town with a 



32 GEORGE ELIOT. 

memorable history that had its relics in church 
and castle) was one of those excellent musi- 
cians here and there to be found in the prov- 
inces, worthy to compare with many a noted 
Kapellmeister in a country which offers more 
plentiful conditions of musical celebrity." 
George Eliot's sympathetic rendering of her 
favorite composers, particularly Beethoven 
and Schubert, was always delightful to her 
friends, although connoisseurs considered her 
possessed of little or no strictly technical 
knowledge. Be that as it may, many an ex- 
quisite passage scattered up and down her 
works, bears witness to her heartfelt apprecia- 
tion of music, which seems to have had a more 
intimate attraction for her than the fine arts. 
She shows little feeling for archaeological 
beauties, in which Warwickshire is so rich : 
in her ' Scenes of Clerical Life ' dismissing a 
fine monument of Lady Jane Grey, a genu- 
ine specimen of old Gothic art at Astley 
Church, with a sneer about "marble war- 
riors, and their wives without noses.'* 

In spite of excessive study, this period of 
Marian's life is not without faint echoes of an 
early love-story of her own. In the hous& 
of one of her married half-sisters she met a 
young man who promised, at that time, to 
take a distinguished position in his profes- 



YOUTHFUL STUDIES, ETC, 33 

sion. A kind of engagement, or semi-engage- 
ment, took place, which Mr. Evans refused to 
countenance, and finally his daughter broke it 
off in a letter, showing both her strong sense 
and profoundly affeptionate nature. At this 
time she must have often had a painful con- 
sciousness of being cut off fro^n that living 
fellowship with the like-minded so stimulating 
to the intellectual life. Men are not so sub- 
ject to this form of soul hunger as women ; 
for at their public 'schools and colleges they 
are brought into contact with their contem- 
poraries, and cannot fail to find comrades 
amongst them of like thoughts and aspira- 
tions with themselves. A fresh life, however, 
at once vivifying to her intellect and stimu- 
lating to her heart, now began for Marian 
Evans in the friendship she formed with Mr. 
and Mrs. Charles Bray of Rosehill, Coventry. 
Rahel — the subtly gifted German woman, 
whose letters and memoirs are a treasury 
of delicate observation and sentiment — ob- 
serves that people of marked s\)iritual affini- 
ties are bound to meet some time or other in 
their lives. If not entirely true, there is a 
good deal to be said for this comforting the- 
ory ; as human beings of similar nature seem 
constantly converging as by some magnetic 
attraction. 



y 



34 



GEORGE ELIOT, 



The circle to which Miss Evans now hap- 
pened to be introduced was in every sense 
congenial and inspiriting. Mr. Bray, his wife, 
and his sister-in-law were a trio more like 
some delightful characters in a first-rate novel 
than the sober inhabitants of a Warwickshire 
country town. Living in a house beautifully 
situated on the outskirts of Coventry, they 
used to spend their lives in philosophical 
speculations, philanthropy, and pleasant so- 
cial hospitality, joining to the ease and laisser 
aller of continental manners a thoroughly 
English geniaUty and trustworthiness. 

Mr. Bray was a wealthy ribbon manufac- 
turer, but had become engrossed from an 
early age jn religious and metaphysical specu- 
lation as well as in political and social ques- 
tions. Beginning to inquire into the dogmas 
which formed the basis of his belief, he found, 
on careful investigation, that they did not 
stand, in his opinion, the test of reason. His 
arguments set his brother-in-law, Mr. Charles 
C. Hennell, a Unitarian, to examine afresh 
and go carefully over the whole ground of 
popular theology, the consequence of th;s 
close study being the * Inquiry concerning 
the Origin of Christianity,' a work which at- 
tracted a good deal of attention when it ap- 
peared, and was translated into German at the 



YOUTHFUL STUDIES, ETC, 35 

instance of David Strauss. It was published 
in 1838, a few years after the appearance 
of the ' Life of Jesus.' In its critical exami- 
nation of the miracles, and in the sifting 
of mythological from historical elements in 
the Gospels, it bears considerable analogy to 
Strauss's great work, although strictly based 
on independent studies, being originally noth- 
ing more than an attempt to solve the doubts 
of a small set of friends. Their doubts were 
solved, but not in the manner originally an- 
ticipated. 

Mrs. Bray, of an essentially religious na- 
ture, shared the opinions of her husband and 
brother, and without conforming to the exter- 
nal rites and ceremonies of a creed, led a 
life of saintly purity and self-devotion. The 
exquisite beauty of her moral nature not only 
attracted Marian to this truly amiable woman, 
but filled her with reverence, and the friend- 
ship then commenced was only ended by 
death. 

In Miss Sara Hennell, Marian Evans found 
another congenial companion who became as 
a sister to her. This singular being, in most 
respects such a contrast to her sister, high- 
strung, nervous, excitable, importing all the 
ardor of feeling into a life of austere thought, 
seemed in a manner mentally to totter under 



36 - GEORGE ELIOT. 

the weight of her own immense metaphysical 
speculations. A casual acquaintance of these 
two young ladies might perhaps have pre- 
dicted that Miss Hennell was the one des- 
tined to achieve fame in the future, and she 
certainly must have been an extraordinary 
mental stimulus to her young friend Marian. 
These gifted sisters, two of a family, all the 
members of which were remarkable, by some 
are identified as the originals of the delight- 
ful Meyrick household in ' Daniel Deronda.' 
Each member of this genial group was al- 
ready, or ultimately became, an author of more 
or less repute. A reviewer in the Westmin' 
ster, writing of Mr. Bray's philosophical pub- 
lications, some years ago, said : " If he would 
reduce his many works to one containing 
nothing unessential, he would doubtless ob- 
tain that high place among the philosophers 
of our country to which his powers of thought 
entitle him." His most popular book, called 
* The Education of the Feelings,' intended for 
use in secular schools, deals with the laws 
of morality practically applied. Mrs. Bray's 
writings, on the same order of subjects, are 
still further simplified for the understanding of 
children. She is the authoress of * Physiology 
for Schools,' * The British Empire,' * Elements 
of Morality/ etc. Her ' Duty to Animals ' has 



YOUTHFUL STUDIESy ETC, 37 

become a class book in the schools of the 
midland counties, and she was one of the first 
among those noble-hearted men and women 
who have endeavored to introduce a greater 
degree of humanity into our treatment of 
animals. 

George Eliot, writing to Mrs. Bray in March 
1873 on this very subject, says : 

" A very good, as well as very*rich, woman, 

Mrs. S , has founded a model school at 

Naples, and has the sympathy of the best 
Italians in her educational efforts. Of course 
a chief point in trying to improve the Italians 
is to teach them kindness to animals, and 

a friend of Mrs. S has confided to her a 

small sum of money — fifty pounds, I think 
— to be applied to the translation and publi- 
cation of some good books for young people, 
which would be likely to rouse in them a 
sympathy with dumb creatures. 

" Will you kindly help me in the effort to 

further Mrs. S *s good work by sending 

me a copy of your book on animals, and also 
by telling me the periodical in which the parts 
of the book first appeared, as well as the titles 
of any other works which you think would 
be worth mentioning for the purpose in ques- 
tion } 

" Mrs. S (as indeed you may probably 



38 GEORGE ELIOT, 

know) is the widow of a German merchant of 
Manchester, as rich as many such merchants 
are, and as benevolent as only the choicest 
few. She knows all sorts of good work for 
the world, and is known by most of the work- 
ers. It struck me, while she was speaking of 
this need of a book to translate, that you had 
done the very thing." 

A few days later the following highly inter- 
esting letter came from the same source : 

" Many thanks for the helpful things you 
have sent me. 'The Wounded Bird' is 
charming. But now something very much 
larger of the same kind must be written, and 
you are the person to write it- — something 
that will bring the emotions, sufferings, and 
possible consolations of the dear brutes viv- 
idly home to the imaginations of children: 
fitted for children of all countries, as Reineke 
Fuchs is comprehensible to all nations. A 
rough notion came to me the other day of 
supposing a house of refuge, not only for dogs,- 
but for all distressed animals. The keeper of 
this refuge understands the language of the 
brutes, which includes differences of dialect 
not hindering communication even between 
birds and dogs, by the help of some Ulysses 
among them who is versed in the various 
tongues, and puts in the needed explanations. 



YOUTHFUL STUDIES, ETC, 39 

Said keeper overhears his refugees solacing 
their evenings by telling the story of their 
experiences, and finally acts as editor of their 
autobiographies. I imagine my long-loved 
fellow-creature, the ugly dog, telling the sor- 
rows and the tender emotions of gratitude 
which have wrought him into a sensitive soul. 
The donkey is another cosmopolitan sufferer, 
and a greater martyr than Saint Lawrence. 
If we only knew what fine motives he has for 
his meek endurance, and how he loves a friend 
who will scratch his nose ! 

" All this is not worth anything except to 
make you feel how much better a plan you 
can think of. 

" Only you must positively write this book 
which everybody wants — this book which 
will do justice to the share our * worthy fel- 
low-laborers ' have had in the groaning and 
^availing of the world towards the birth of 
the right and fair. 

" But you must not do it without the * sus- 
tenance of labor,' — I don't say ' pay,' since 
there is no pay for good work. Let Mr. . . . 
be blest with the blessing of the unscrupulous. 
I want to contribute something towards help- 
ing the brutes, and helping the children, espe- 
cially the southern children, to be good to the 
creatures who are continually at their mercy. 



40 



GEORGE ELIOT. 



I can't write the needed book myself, but I 
feel sure that you can, and that you will not 
refuse the duty." 

Mrs. Bray's answer to this humorous sug- 
gestion may be gathered from George Eliot's 
amiable reply : 

" I see at once that you must be right about 
the necessity for being simple and literal. In 
fact I have ridiculous impulses in teaching 
children, and always make the horizon too 
wide. 

" ' The Wounded Bird ' is perfect of its 
kind, and that kind is the best for a larger 
work. You yourself see clearly that it is an 
exceptional case for any one to be able to 
write books for children without putting in 
them false morality disguised as devout re- 
ligion. And you are one of the exceptional 
cases. I am quite sure, from what you have 
done, that you can do the thing which is still 
wanted to be done. As to imagination, ' The 
Wounded Bird ' is full of imagination." 

These extracts pleasantly illustrate both the 
writer and recipient of such humane letters ; 
and, though written at a much later period, 
not only give an idea of the nature of Mrs. 
Bray's literary pursuits, but of tlie friendly 
relations subsisting to the end between her 
and George Eliot 



YOUTHFUL STUDIES, ETC. 41 

Of Miss Hennell's work it is more difficult 
to speak without entering more deeply into 
her subject-matter than is compatible with 
the scope of the present work. In one of 
her best known books, entitled ' Thoughts in 
Aid of Faith/ she makes the daring attempt 
to trace the evolution of religion, her mode 
of thought partaking at once of the scientific 
and the mystical. For the present she seems 
to be one of the very few women who have 
ventured into the arena of philosophy; and, 
curiously enough, her doctrine is that there 
should be a feminine method in metaphysics 
as well as a masculine, the sexes, according 
to this singular theory, finding their counter- 
part in religion and science. It may be re- 
membered that George Eliot, in one of her 
essays, is of opinion that women should en- 
deavor to make some distinctively feminine 
contributions to the intellectual pursuits they 
engage in, saying, " Let the whole field of 
reality be laid open to woman as well as to 
man, and then that which is peculiar in her 
mental modification, instead of being, as it is 
now, a source of discord and repulsion be- 
tween the sexes, will be found to be a neces- 
sary complement to the truth and beauty of 
life. Then we shall have that marriage of 
minds which alone can blend all the hues 



42 



GEORGE ELIOT, 



of thought and feeling in one lovely rainbow 
of promise for the harvest of happiness." 
Something of the same idea lies at the root 
of much in Miss Hennell's mystical disqui- 
sitions. 

This circumstantial account of the circle to 
which Miss Evans was now introduced has 
been given, because it consisted of friends 
who, more than any others, helped in the 
growth and formation of her mind. No hu- 
man being, indeed, can be fully understood 
without some knowledge of the companions 
that at one time or other, but especially during 
the period of development, have been inti- 
mately associated with his or her life. How- 
ever vastly a mountain may appear to loom 
above us from the plain, on ascending to its 
summit one always finds innumerable lesser 
eminences which all help in making up the 
one imposing central effect. And similarly 
in the world of mind, many superior natures, 
in varying degrees, all contribute their share 
towards the maturing of that exceptional in- 
tellectual product whose topmost summit is 
genius. 

The lady who first introduced Marian Evans 
to the Brays was not without an object of her 
own, for her young friend — whose religious 
fervor, tinged with evangelical sentiment, was 



YOUTHFUL STUDIES, ETC. 43 

as conspicuous as her unusual learning and 
thoughtf ulness — seemed to her peculiarly fit- 
ted to exercise a beneficial influence on the 
Rosehill household, where generally unortho- 
dox opinions were much in vogue. 

Up to the age of seventeen or eighteen 
Marian had been considered the most truly 
pious member of her family, being earnestly 
bent, as she says, " to shape this anomalous 
English Christian life of ours into some con- 
sistency with the spirit and simple verbal tenor 
of the New Testament." " I was brought up," 
she informs another correspondent, ** in the 
Church of England, and have never joined 
any other religious society ; but I have had 
close acquaintance with many dissenters of 
various sects, from Calvinistic Anabaptists to 
Unitarians." Her inner life at this time is 
faithfully mirrored in the spiritual experiences 
of Maggie TuUiver. Marian Evans was not 
one who could rest satisfied with outward ob- 
servances and lip-worship : she needed a faith 
which should give unity and sanctity to the 
conception of life ; which should awaken " that 
recognition of something to be lived for be- 
yond the mere satisfaction of self, which is to 
the moral life what the addition of a great 
central ganglion is to animal life." At one 
time Evangelicalism supplied her with the 



44 



GEORGE ELIOT, 



most essential conditions of a religious life: 
with all the vehemence of an ardent nature 
she flung her whole soul into a passionate 
acceptance of the teaching of Christianity* 
carrying her zeal to the pitch of asceticism. 

This was the state of her mind, at the age 
of seventeen, when her aunt from Wirksworth 
came to stay with her. Mrs. Elizabeth Evans 
(who came afterwards to be largely identified 
with Dinah Morris) was a zealous Wesleyan, 
having at one time been a noted preaicher ; 
but her niece, then a rigid Calvinist, hardly 
thought her doctrine strict enough. When 
this same aunt paid her a visit, some years 
afterwards, at Foleshill, Marian's views had 
already undergone a complete transformation, 
and their intercourse was constrained and 
painful ; for the young evangelical enthusiast, 
who had been a favorite in clerical circles, 
was now in what she afterwards described 
as a "crude state of freethinking." It was a 
period of transition through which she grad- 
ually passed into a new religious synthesis. 

Her intimacy with the Brays began about 
the time when these new doubts were begin- 
ning to ferment in her. Her expanding mind, 
nourished on the best literature, ancient and 
modern, began to feel cramped by dogmas 
that had now lost their vitality ; yet a bt*eak 



YOUTHFUL STUDIES, ETC, 45 

with an inherited form of belief to which a 
thousand tender associations bound her, was 
a catastrophe she shrank from with, dread. 
Hence a period of mental uncertainty and 
trouble. In consequence of th^se inward 
questionings, it happened that the^ young lady 
who had been unwittingly brought to convert 
her new acquaintances was concerted by them. 
In intercourse with them she was able freely 
to open her mind, their enlightened views 
helping her in this crisis of ^her)spiritual life ; 
and she found it an intense relief to feel no 
longer bound to reconcile her nipral and in- 
tellectual perceptions with a particular form 
of worship. 

The antagonism she met with in certain 
quarters, the social persec-ution from which 
she had much to suffer, are perhaps responsi- 
ble for some of the sharp, caustic irony with 
which she afterwards assailed certain theologi- 
cal habits of thought. It is not unlikely that^ 
in some of her essays for the 'Westminster 
Review she mainljr expressed the thoughts 
which were stirred in her by the opposition 
she encountered at this period of her life — 
as, for example, in the brilliant paper entitled 
* Worldliness and Other- Worldliness/ which 
contains such a scathing passage as the fol- 
lowing : 



46 GEORGE EUOT. 

"For certain other elements of virtue, 
which are of more obvious importance to un- 
theological minds, — a delicate sense of our 
neighbor's rights, an active participation in 
the joys and sorrows of our fellow-men, a 
magnanimous' acceptance of privation or suf- 
fering for ourselves when it is the condition 
of good to others, in a word, the extension 
and intensification of our sympathetic nature, 
we think it of some importance to contend, 
that they have no more direct relation to the 
belief in a future state than the interchange 
of gases in the lungs has to the plurality of 
worlds. Nay, to us it is conceivable that to 
some minds the deep pathos lying in ♦ the 
thought of human mortality — that we are 
here for a little while and then vanish away, 
that this earthly life is all that is given to 'our 
loved ones,. and to our many suffering fellow- 
men, lies nea'rer the fountains of moral emo- 
tion than the conception of extended existence. 
. . . To us it is matter of unmixed rejoicing 
that this latter necessity of healthful life is 
independent of theological ink, and that it? 
evolution is insured in the interaction of hur 
man souls as certainly as the evolution of 
science or of art, with which, indeed, it is but 
a twin ray, melting into them with undefinable 
limits." 



YOUTHFUL STUDIES, ETC. 47 

It was, of course, inevitable that her changed 
tone of mind should attract the attention of 
the family and friends of Marian, and that the 
backsliding of so exemplary a member should 
afford matter for scandal in many a clerical 
circle and evangelical tea-meeting. Close to 
the Evanses there lived at that time a dis- 
senting minister, whose daughter Mary was a 
particular favorite of Marian Evans. There 
had been much neighborly intimacy between 
the two young ladies, and though thefe was 
only five years' difference between them, 
Marian always inspired her friend with a 
feeling of awe at her intellectual superiority. 
Yet her sympathy — that sympathy with all 
human life which was the strongest element 
of her character — was even then so irresisti- 
ble that every little trouble of Mary's life was 
intrusted to her keeping. But the sudden 
discovery of their daughter's friend being an 
" infidel " came with the shock of a thunder- 
clap on the parents. Much hot argument 
passed between the minister and this youthful 
controversialist, but the former clinched the 
whole question by a triumphant reference to 
the dispersion of the Jews throughout the 
world as an irrefutable proof of the divine in- 
spiration of the Bible. In spite of this vital 
difference on religious questions. Miss Evans 



48 GEORGE ELIOT. 

was suffered to go on giving the minister's 
daughter lessons in German, which were 
continued for two or three years, she hav- 
ing generously undertaken this labor of love 
twice a week, because she judged from the 
shape of her young friend's head — phrenol- 
ogy being rife in those days — that she must 
have an excellent understanding. But, better 
than languages, she taught her the value of 
time, always cutting short mere random talk 
by simply ignoring it. Altogether the won- 
derful strength of her personality manifested 
itself even at this early period in the indelible 
impression it left on her pupil's memory, many 
of her sayings remaining graven on it as 
on stone. As, for instance, when one day 
twitting Mary's too great self-esteem she 
remarked, " We are very apt to measure our- 
selves by our aspiration instead of our per- 
formance." Or when on a friend's asking, 
" What is the meaning of Faust } '' she re- 
plied, " The same as the meaning of the uni- 
verse." While reading ' Wallenstein' s Lager' 
with her young pupil, the latter happened 
to say how life-like -the characters seemed : 
"Don't S2iy seemed" exclainted Marian; "we 
know that they are true to the life." And 
she immediately began repeating .the talk of 
laborers, farriers, butchers, and others of that 



YOUTHFUL STUDIES, ETC, 49 

class, with such close imitation as to startle 
her friend. Is not this a fore-shadowing of 
the inimitable scene at the ' Rainbow ' ? 

By far the most trying consequence of her 
change of views was that now, for the first 
time, Marian was brought into collision with 
her father, whose pet she had always been. 
He could not understand her inward perplexi- 
ties, nor the need of her soul for complete 
inward unity of thought, a condition impos- 
sible to her under the limiting conditions 
of a dogmatic evangelicalism, " where folly 
often mistakes itself for wisdom, ignorance 
gives itself airs of knowledge, and selfish- 
ness, turning its eyes upwards, calls itself 
religion." She, on the other hand, after a 
painful struggle, wanted to break away from 
the old forms of worship, and refused to go 
to church. Deeply attached though she was 
to her father, the need to make her acts con- 
form with her convictions became irresistible. 
Under such conflicting tendencies a rupture 
between father and daughter became immi- 
nent, and for a short time a breaking up of 
the home was contemplated, Marian intending 
to go and live /By herself in Coventry. One 
of the leading traits in her nature was its ad- 
hesiveness, however, and the threat of separa- 
tion proved so painful to her that her fjriends, 

4 



50 



GEORGE ELIOT. 



Mr. and Mrs. Bray, persuaded her to conform 
to her father's wishes as far as outward ob- 
servances were implied, and for the rest he 
did not trouble himself to inquire into her 
thoughts or occupations. 

From a letter written at this period it 
appears that the * Inquiry Concerning the 
Origin of Christianity' had made a most 
powerful impression on her mind. Indeed, 
she dated from it a new birth. But so earnest 
and conscientious was she in her studies, that 
before beginning its longed-for * perusal, she 
and a friend determined to read the Bible 
through again from beginning to end. 

The intimacy between the inmates of Rose- 
hill and the girl student at Foleshill mean- 
while was constantly growing closer. They 
met daily, and in their midst the humorous 
side of her nature expanded no less than 
her intellect. Although striking ordinary ac- 
quaintances by an abnormal gravity, when 
completely at her ease she at times bubbled 
over with fun and gayety, irradiated by the 
unexpected flashes of a wit whose full scope 
was probably as yet unsuspected by its pos- 
sessor. Not but that Miss Evans and her 
friends must have been conscious, even at 
that early age, of extraordinary powers in her, 
destined some day to give her a conspicuous 



YOUTHFUL STUDIES, ETC. 5 1 

position in the world. For her conversation 
was already so full of charm, depth, and com- 
prehensiveness, that all talk after hers seemed 
stale and common-place. Many were the. dis- 
cussions in those days between Mr. Bray and 
Marian Evans, and though frequently broken 
o£E in fierce dispute one evening, they always 
began again quite amicably the next. Mr. 
Bray probably exercised considerable influ- 
ence on his young friend's mind at this im- 
pressible period of life ; perhaps her attention 
to philosophy was first roused by acquaint- 
ance with him, and his varied acquirements 
in this department may have helped in giving 
a positive direction to her own thoughts. 
Mr. Bray was just then working out his 

* Philosophy of Necessity,' the problems dis- 
cussed being the same as those which have 
occupied the leading thinkers of the day : 
Auguste Comte in his * Positive Philoso- 
phy ; ' Buckle in his * History of Civiliza- 
tion ; ' and Mr. Herbert Spencer in his 

* Sociology.' The theory that, as an indi- 
vidual and collectively, man is as much sub- 
ject to law as any of the other entities in 
nature, was one of those magnificent ideas 
which revolutionize the world of thought. 
Many minds, in different countries, of dif- 
ferent calibre, were all trying to systematize 



52 



GEORGE ELIOT. 



what knowledge there was on this subject in 
order to convert hypothesis into demonstra- 
tion. To what extent Mr. Bray may have 
based his 'Philosophy of Necessity' on in- 
dependent research, or how much was merely 
assimilated from contemporary sources, we 
cannot here inquire. Enough that the ideas 
embodied in it represented some of the most 
vital thought of the age, and contributed 
therefore not a little to the formation of 
George Eliot's mind, and to the grip which 
she presently displayed in the handling of 
philosophical topics. 

In 1842 the sensation created by Dr. 
Strauss's Leben Jesu had even extended 
to so remote a district as Warwickshire. 
Some persons of advanced opinions, deeply 
impressed by its penetrating historical •criti- 
cism, which was in fact Niebuhr's niethod 
applied to the elucidation of the Gospels, 
were very desirous of obtaining an English 
translation of this work ; meeting at the 
house of a common friend, the late Mr. 
Joseph Parkes of Birmingham, they agreed, 
in the first blush of their enthusiasm, to raise 
amongst them whatever sum might be re- 
quired for the purpose. Mr. Hennell, the 
leading spirit in this enterprise, proposed that 
the translation should be undertaken by Miss 



YOUTHFUL STUDIES, ETC. 53 

Brabant, the accomplished daughter of Dr. 
Brabant, a scholar deeply versed in theologi- 
cal matters, who was in friendly correspond- 
ence with Strauss and Paulus in Germany 
and. with Coleridge and Grote in England. 
The lady in question, though still in her 
teens, was peculiarly fitted for the task, as 
she had already translated some of Baur's 
erudite writings on theological subjects into 
English. But when she had done about one 
half of the first volume, her learned labors 
came to an unexpected conclusion, as she be- 
came engaged to Mr. Hennell, who to great 
mental attainments joined much winning buoy- 
ancy of manner. And on her marriage with 
this gentleman she had to relinquish her task 
as too laborious. ♦ 

Miss Brabant's acquaintance with Marian 
began in 1843, ^"^^ ^'^ the summer of that 
year the whole friendly group started on an 
excursion to Tenby. During their stay at 
this watering-place the lady who had begun, 
and the lady destined eventually to accom- 
plish, the enormous labor of translating the 
* Life of Jesus,' gave tokens of feminine 
frivolity by insisting on going to a public 
ball, where, however, they were disappointed, 
as partners were very scarce. It should be 
remembered that Marian Evans was only 



54 GEORGE ELIOT. 

twenty-three years old at this time, but, 
though she had not yet done anything, her 
friends already thought her a wonderful wo- 
man. She never seems to have had any real 
youthfulness, and her personal appearance 
greatly improved with time. It is only to 
the finest natures, it should be remembered, 
that age gives an added beauty and distinc- 
tion ; for the most persistent self has then 
worked its way to the surface, having modi- 
fied the expression, and to some extent the 
features, to its own likeness. 

There exists a colored sketch done by Mrs. 
Bray about this period, which gives one a 
glimpse of George Eliot in her girlhood. In 
those Foleshill days she had a quantity of 
soft pale-brown hair worn in ringlets. Her 
head was massive, her features powerful and 
rugged, her mouth large but shapely, the jaw 
singularly square for a woman, yet having a 
certain delicacy of outline. A neutral tone 
of coloring did not help to relieve this gen- 
eral heaviness of structure, the complexion 
being pale but not fair. Nevertheless the 
play of expression and the wonderful mobility 
of the mouth, which increased with age, gave 
a womanly softness to the countenance in cu- 
rious contrast with its framework. Her eyes, 
of a gray-blue, constantly varying in color, 



YOUTHFUL STUDIES, ETC, 55 

Striking some as intensely blue, others as of 
a pale, washed-out gray, were small and not 
beautiful in themselves, but when she grew 
animated in conversation, those eyes lit up 
the whole face, seeming in a manner to trans- 
figure it. So much was this the case, that a 
young lady, who had once enjoyed an hour's 
conversation with her, came away under its 
spell with the impression that she was beau- 
tiful, but afterwards, on seeing George Eliot 
again when she was not talking, she could 
hardly believe her to be the same person. The 
charm of her nature disclosed itself in her 
manner and iji her voice, the latter recalling 
that of Dorothea, in being " like the voice of 
a soul that has once lived in an yEolian harp." 
It was low and deep, yibrating with sympathy. 
Mr. Bray, an enthusiastic believer in phre- 
nology, was so much struck with the grand 
proportions of her head that he took Marian 
Evans to London to have a cast taken. He 
thinks that, after that of Napoleon, her head 
showed the largest development from brow to 
ear of any person's recorded. The similarity 
of type between George Eliot's face and Savo- 
narola's has been frequently pointed out. Some 
affinity in their natures may have led her, if 
unconsciously, to select that epoch of Florentine 
life in which he played so prominent a part. 



56 GEORGE ELIOT. 

Though not above the middle height 
Marian gave people the impression of being 
much taller than she really was, her figure, 
although thin and slight, being well-poised 
and not without a certain sturdiness of make. 
She was never robust in health, being deli- 
cately strung, and of a highly nervous tem- 
perament. In youth the keen excitability of 
her nature often made her wayward and hys- 
terical. In fact her extraordinary intellectual 
vigor did not exclude the susceptibilities and 
weaknesses of a peculiarly feminine organiza- 
tion. With all her mental activity she yet 
led an intensely emotional life, a life which 
must have held hidden trials for her, as in 
those days she was known by her friends " to 
weep bucketfuls of tears." 

A woman of strong passions, like her own 
Maggie, deeply affectionate by nature, of a 
clinging tenderness of disposition, Marian 
Evans went through much inward struggle, 
through many painful experiences before she 
reached the moral self-government of her 
later years. Had she not, it is hardly likely 
that she could have entered with so deep a 
comprehension into the most intricate wind- 
ings of the human heart. That, of course, 
was to a great extent due to her sympathy, 
sympathy being the strongest quality of her 



YOUTHFUL STUDIES, ETC. 57 

moral nature. She flung herself, as it were, 
into other lives, making their affairs, their 
hopes, their sorrows her own. And this 
power of identifying herself with the people 
she came near had the effect of a magnet 
in attracting her fellow-creatures. If friends 
went to her in their trouble they would find 
not only that she entered with deep feeling 
into their most minute concerns, but that, by 
gradual degrees, she lifted them beyond their 
personal distress, and that they would leave 
her presence in an ennobled and elevated 
frame of mind. This sympathy was closely 
connected with her faculty of detecting and 
responding to anything that showed the 
smallest sign of intellectual vitality. She es- 
sentially resembled Socrates in her manner 
of eliciting whatsoever capacity for thought 
might be latent in the people she came in 
contact with : were it only a shoemaker or 
day-laborer, she would never rest till she had 
found out in what points that particular man 
differed from other men of his class. She 
always rather educed what was in others than 
impressed herself on them ; showing much 
kindliness of heart in drawing out people who 
were shy. Sympathy was the keynote of her \ 
nature, the source of her iridescent hiimor, of 
her subtle knowledge of character, and of her 
dramatic genius. 



CHAPTER IV. 

TRANSLATION OF STRAUSS AND FEUERBACH. — 
TOUR ON THE CONTINENT. 

Miss Brabant's marriage to Mr. Charles 
Hehnell occurred some months after this 
excursion to Tenby. In the meanwhile it 
was settled that Miss Evans should continue 
her translation of Dr. Strauss's Leben yesu. 
Thus her first introduction to literature was 
in a sense accidental. The result proved her 
admirably fitted for the task ; for her version 
of this searching and voluminous work re- 
mains a masterpiece of clear nervous English, 
at the same time faithfully rendering the 
spirit of the original. But it was a vast and 
laborious undertaking, requiring a large share 
of patience, will, and energy, quite apart from 
the necessary mental qualifications. On this 
occasion, to fit herself more fully for her 
weighty task, Marian taught herself a consid- 
erable amount of Hebrew. But she groaned, 
at times, under the pressure of the toil which 
had necessarily to be endured, feeling tempted 



r 



TRANSLATION OF STRAUSS, ETC. 59 

to relinquish what must often have seemed 
almost intolerable drudgery. The active in- 
terest and encouragement of her friends, 
however, tided her over these moments of 
discouragement, and after three years of as- 
siduous application, the translation was finally 
completed, and brought out by Dr. (then Mr.) 
John Chapman in 1846. It is probably safe 
' to assume that the composition of none of her 
novels cost George Eliot half the effort and 
toil which this translation had done. Yet so 
badly is this kind of literary work remuner- 
ated, that twenty pounds was the sum paid 
for what had cost three years of hard labor ! 

Indeed, by this time, most of the twelve 
friends who had originally guaranteed the 
sum necessary for the translation and pub- 
lication of the * Life of Jesus' had conven- 
iently forgotten the matter ; and had it not 
been for the generosity of Mr. Joseph Parkes, 
who volunteered to advance the necessary 
funds, who knows how long the MS. transla- 
tion might have lain dormant in a drawer at 
Foleshill } It no sooner saw the light, how- 
ever, than every one recognized the excep- 
tional merits of the work. And for several 
years afterwards Miss Evans continued to be 
chiefly known as the translator of Strauss's 
Leben yesu. 



6o GEORGE ELIOT, 

Soon after relieving Miss Brabant from the 
task of translation, Miss Evans went to stay 
for a time with her friend's father, Dr. Bra- 
bant, who sadly felt the loss of his daughter's 
intelligent and enlivening companionship. No 
doubt the society of this accomplished scholar, 
described by Mr. Grote as " a vigorous self- 
thinking intellect," was no less congenial than 
instructive to his young companion ; while 
her singular mental acuteness and affection- 
ate womanly ways were most grateful to the 
lonely old man. There is something very 
attractive in this episode of George Eliofs 
life. It recalls a frequently recurring situa- 
tion in her novels, particularly that touching 
one of the self-renouncing devotion with which 
the ardent Romola throws herself into her 
afflicted father's learned and recondite pur- 
suits. 

There exists a letter written to an intimate 
friend in 1846, soon after the translation of 
Strauss was finished, which, I should say, 
already shows the future novelist in embryo. 
In this delightfully humorous mystification of 
her friends, Miss Evans pretends that, to her 
gratification, she has actually had a visit from 
a real live German professor, whose musty per- 
son was encased in a still mustier coat. This 
learned personage has come over to England 



TRANSLATION OF STRAUSS, ETC, 6 1 

with the single purpose of getting his volumi- 
nous writings translated into English. There 
are al least twenty volumes, all unpublished, 
owing to the envious machinations of rival 
authors, none of them treating of anything 
more modern than Cheops, or the invention 
of the hieroglyphics. The respectable pro- 
fessor's object in coming to England is to 
secure a wife and translator in one. But 
though, on inquiry, he finds that the ladies 
engaged in translation are legion, they mostly 
turn out to be utterly incompetent, besides 
not answering to his requirements in other 
respects. . The qualifications he looks for in a 
wife, besides a thorough acquaintance with 
English and German, being personal ugliness 
and a snug little capital, sufficient to supply 
him with a moderate allowance of tobacco 
and Sckwarzbier, after defraying the expense 
of printing his books. To find this phoenix 
among women he is sent to Coventry on all 
hands. 

In Miss Evans, so she runs on, the aspiring 
professor finds his utmost wishes realized, 
and so proposes to her on the spot ; think- 
ing that it may be her last chance, she ac- 
cepts him with equal celerity, and her father, 
although strongly objecting to a foreigner, is 
induced to give his consent for the same 



62 GEORGE ELIOT. 

reason. The lady's only stipulation is that 
her future husband shall take her out of Eng- 
land, with its dreary climate and drearier 
inhabitants. This being settled, she invites 
her friends to come to her wedding, which is 
to take place next week. 

This lively little jeu d' esprit is written in 
the wittiest manner, and one cannot help 
fancying that this German Dryasdust con- 
tained the germ of one of her very subtlest 
masterpieces in characterization, that of the 
much-to-be-pitied Casaubon, the very Sisy- 
phus of authors. In the lady, too, willing to 
marry her parchment-bound suitor for the 
sake of co-operating in his abstruse mental 
labors, we have a faint adumbration of the 
simple-minded Dorothea. 

But these sudden stirrings at original in- 
vention did not prevent Miss Evans from 
undertaking another task, similar to her last, * 
if not so laborious. She now set about trans- 
lating Ludwig Feuerbach's Wesen des Christeti- 
thunis. This daring philosopher, who kept 
aloof from professional honors, and dwelt 
apart in a wood, that he might be free to 
handle questions of theology and metaphysics 
with absolute fearlessness, had created a great 
sensation by his philosophical criticism in 
Germany. Unlike his countrymen, whose 



TRANSLATION OF STRAUSS, ETC. 63 

writings on these subjects are usually envel- 
oped in such an impenetrable mist that their 
most perilous ideas pass harmlessly over the 
heads of the multitude, Feuerbach, by his 
keen incisiveness of language and luminous- 
ness of exposition, was calculated to bring 
his meaning home to the average reader. 
Mr. Garnett's account of the * Essence of 
Christianity * in the * Encyclopaedia Britan- 
nica,' admirably concise as it is, may be 
quoted here, as conveying in the fewest 
words the gist of this " famous treatise, where 
Feuerbach shows that every article of Chris- 
tian belief corresponds to some instinct or 
necessity of man's nature, from which he in- 
fers that it is the creation and embodiment 
of some human wish, hope, or apprehension. 
. . . Following up the hint-of one of the old- 
est Greek philosophers, he demonstrates that 
'religious ideas have their counterparts in 
human nature, and assumes that they must 
be its product." 

The translation of the * Essence of Chris- 
tianity' was also published by Mr. Chapman 
in 1854. It appeared in his 'Quarterly Se- 
ries,' destined " to consist of works by learned 
and profound thinkers, embracing the sub- 
jects of theology, philosophy, biblical criti- 
cism, and the history of opinion." Probably 



64 GEORGE ELIOT. 

because her former translation had been so 
eminently successful, Miss Evans received 
fifty pounds for her present work. But there 
was no demand for it in England, and Mr. 
Chapman lost heavily by its publication. 

About the same period Miss Evans also 
translated Spinoza's De Deo for the benefit 
of an inquiring friend. But her English ver- 
sion of the * Ethics * was not undertaken till 
the year 1854, after she had left her home at 
Foleshill. In applying herself to the severe 
labor of rendering one philosophical work 
after another into English, Miss Evans, no 
doubt, was bent on elucidating for herself 
some of the most vital problems which en- 
gage the mind when once it has shaken it- 
self free from purely traditional beliefs, rather 
than on securing for herself any pecuniary 
advantages. But her admirable translations 
attracted the attention of the like-minded, 
and she became gradually known to some of 
the most distinguished men of the time. 

Unfortunately her father's health now be- 
gan to fail, causing her no little pain and 
anxiety. At some period during his illness 
she stayed with him in the Isle of Wight, for 
in a letter to Mrs. Bray, written many years 
afterwards, she says, " The ' Sir Charles Gran- 
dison ' you are reading must be the series of 



TRANSLATION OF STRAUSS, ETC. 65 

little fat volumes you lent me to carry to the 
Isle of Wight, where I read it at every inter- 
val when my father did not want me, and 
was sorry that the long novel was not longer. 
It is a solace to hear of any one's reading and 
enjoying Richardson. We have fallen on an 
evil generation who would not read 'Clarissa* 
even in an abridged form. The French have 
been its most enthusiastic admirers, but I 
don't know whether their present admiration 
is more than traditional, like their set phrases 
about their own classics." 

During the last year of her father s life his 
daughter was also in the habit of reading 
Scott's novels aloud to him for several hours 
of each day ; she must thus have become 
deeply versed in his manner of telling the 
stories in which she continued to delight all 
her life ; and in speaking of the widening of 
our sympathies which a picture of human life 
by a great artist is calculated to produce, 
even in the most trivial and selfish, she gives 
as an instance Scott's description of Luckie 
Mucklebackit's cottage, and his story of the 
* Two Drovers.' 

But a heavy loss now befell Marian Evans 
in the death of her father, which occurred in 
1849. Long afterwards nothing seemed to 
afford consolation to her grief. For eight 

5 



J 



66 GEORGE ELIOT. 

years these two had kept house together, and 
the deepest mutual affection had always sub- 
sisted between them. Marian ever treasured 
her father's memory. As George Eliot she 
loved to recall in her works everything as- 
sociated with him in her childhood; those 
happy • times when, standing between her 
fathers knees, ^he used to be driven by him 
to "outlying hamlets, whose groups of in- 
habitants were as distinctive to my imagina- 
tion as if they belonged to different regions 
of the globe." Miss Evans, however, was 
not suffered to mourn uncomforted. The 
tender friends who cared for her as a sister, 
now planned a tour to the Continent in hopes 
that the change of scene and associations 
would soften her grief. 

So they started on their travels, going to 
Switzerland and Italy by the approved route, 
which in those days was not so hackneyed 
as it now is. To so penetrating an observer as 
Miss Evans there must have been an infinite 
interest in this first sight of the Continent. 
But the journey did not seem to dispel her 
grief, and she continued in such very low 
spirits that Mrs. Bray almost regretted hav- 
ing taken her abroad so soon after her be- 
reavement Her terror, too, at the giddy 
passes which they had to cross, with preci* 



TOUR ON THE CONTINENT, 6j 

V 

pices yawning on either hand — so that it 
seemed as if a false step must send them 
rolling into the abyss — was so overpowering 
that the sublime spectacle of the snow-clad 
Alps seemed comparatively to produce but 
little impression on her. Her moral triumph 
over this constitutional timidity, when any 
special occasion arose, was all the more re- 
markable. One day when crossing the Col 
de Balme from Martigny to Chamounix, one 
of the side-saddles was found to be badly 
fitted, and would keep turning round, to the 
risk of the rider, if not very careful, slipping 
off at any moment. Marian, however, insisted 
on having this defective saddle in spite of 
the protest of Mrs. Bray, who felt quite 
guilty whenever they came to any perilous 
places. 

How different is this timidity from George 
Sand's hardy spirit of enterprise! No one 
who has read that captivating book, her 
Lettres d'lin Voyagetir, can forget the great 
Frenchwoman's description of a Swiss expe- 
dition, during which, while encumbered with 
two young children, she seems to have borne 
all the perils, fatigues, and privations of a 
toilsome ascent with the hardihood of a 
mountaineer. But it should not be forgot- 
ten that Miss Evans was just then in a 



68 * GEORGE ELIOT. 

peculiarly nervous and excitable condition, 
and her frequent fits of weeping were a source 
of pain to her anxious fellow-travellers. She 
had, in fact, been so assiduous in attendance 
on her sick father, that she was physically 
broken down for a time. Under these cir- 
cumstances an immediate return to England 
seemed unadvisable, and, when her friends 
started on their homeward journey, it was 
decided that Marian should remain behind 
at Geneva. 

Here, amid scenes so intimately associated 
with genius — where the ** self-torturing soph- 
ist, wild Rousseau," placed the home of his 

* Nouvelle H^lotse, and the octogenarian Vol- 
taire spent the serene Indian summer of his 
stirring career ; where Gibbon wrote his ' His- 
tory of the Decline and Fall of the Roman 
Empire ; ' where Byron and Shelley sought 
refuge from the hatred of their countrymen, 
and which Madame de Stael complainingly 
exchanged for her beloved Rue du Bac — 
here the future author of *Romola* and 

• Middlemarch ' gradually recovered under the 
sublime influences of Nature's healing beau- 
ties. 

For about eight months Miss Evans lived 
at a boarding-house, " Le Plongeau," near 
Geneva. But she was glad to find a quieter 



TOUR ON THE CONTINENT 69 

retreat in the family of an artist, M. D' Albert, 
becoming much attached to him and his 
wife. Established in one of the lofty upper 
stories of this pleasant house, with the blue 
shimmering waters of the lake glancing far 
below, and the awful heights of Mont Blanc 
solemnly dominating the entire landscape, 
she not only loved to prosecute her studies, 
but, in isolation froih mankind, to plan glo- 
rious schemes for their welfare. During this 
stay she drank deep of Rousseau, whose 
works, especially Les Confessions^ made an 
indelible impression on her. And when in- 
citing a friend to study French, she remarked 
that it was worth learning that language, if 
only to read him. At the same period Marian 
probably became familiarized with the mag- 
nificent social Utopias of St. Simon, Proudhon, 
and other French writers. Having* under- 
gone a kind of mental revolution herself not 
so long ago, she must have felt some sym- 
pathy with the thrilling hopes of liberty 
which had agitated the states of Western 
Europe in 1849. ^^^' ^^ I have already 
pointed out, her nature had conservative 
leanings. She believed in progress only as 
the result of evolution, not revolution. And- 
in one of her most incisive essays, entitled 
* The National History of German Life,' she 



70 GEORGE ELIOT, 

finely points out the "notable failure of revo- 
lutionary attempts conducted from the point 
of view of abstract democratic and socialistic 
theories." In the same article she draws a 
striking parallel between the growth of lan- 
guage and that of political institutions, con- 
tending that it would be as unsatisfactory to 
"construct a universal language on a rational 
basis" — one that had "no uncertainty, no 
whims of idiom, no cumbrous forms, no fitful 
shimmer of many-hued significance, no hoary 
archaisms 'familiar with forgotten years,'" — 
as abruptly to alter forms of government 
which are nothing, in fact, but the result of 
historical growth, systematically embodied by 
society. 

Besides the fascinations of study, and the 
outward glory of nature, the charm of social 
intercourse was not wanting to this life at 
Geneva. In M. D* Albert, a very superior 
man, gentle, refined, and of unusual mental 
attainments, she found a highly desirable daily 
companion. He was an artist by profession, 
and it is whispered that he suggested some 
of the traits in the character of the delicate- 
minded Philip Wakem in the * Mill on the 
Floss.* The only portrait in oils which ex- 
ists of George Eliot is one painted by M. 
D* Albert at this interesting time of her life 



TOUR ON THE CONTINENT 71 

She inspired him, like most people who came 
into personal contact with her, with the ut- 
most admiration and regard, and, wishing to 
be of some service, he escorted Miss Evans 
to England on her return thither. Curiously 
enough, M. D' Albert subsequently translated 
one of her works, probably * Adam Bede,' 
without in the least suspecting who its real 
author was. 

It is always a shock when vital changes 
have occurred in one's individual lot to re- 
turn to a well-known place, after an absence 
of some duration, to find it wearing the same 
unchangeable aspect. One expects somehow 
that fields and streets and houses would show 
some alteration corresponding to that within 
ourselves. But already from a distance the 
twin spires of Coventry, familiar as house- 
hold words to the Warwickshire girl, greeted 
the eyes of the returning traveller. In spite 
of all love for her native spot of earth, this 
was a heavy time to Marian Evans. Her 
father was dead, the home where- she had 
dwelt as mistress for so many years brokerr 
up, the present appearing blank and comfort- 
less, the future uncertain and vaguely terrify- 
ing. The question now was where she should 
live, what she should do, to what purposes 
turn the genius whose untried and partially 



72 QEORGE EUOT. 

unsuspectea powers were darkly agitating her 
whole being. 

As has been already said, Marian Evans 
had a highly complex nature, compounded of 
many contradictory impulses, which, though 
gradually brought into harmony as life ma- 
tured, were always pulling her, in those days, 
in different directions. Thus, though she 
possessed strong family affections, she could 
not help feeling that to go and take up her 
abode in the house of some relative, where 
life resolved itself into a monotonous recur- 
rence of petty considerations, something after 
the Glegg pattern, would be little short of 
crucifixion to her, and, however deep her at- 
tachment for her native soil may have been, 
she yet sighed passionately to break away 
from its associations, and to become " a wan- 
derer and a pilgrim on the face of the earth." 

For some little time after her return from 
abroad Marian took up her residence with 
her brother and his family. But the children 
who had toddled hand-in-hand in the fields 
together had now diverged so widely that no 
memories of a mutual past could bridge over 
the chasm that divided them. Under these 
circumstances the family at Rosehill pressed 
her to make their home permanently hers, 
:;aiid for about a year, from 1850 to 1851, she 



c • 



t- b 



TOUR ON THE CONTINENT. 73 

became the member of a household in fullest 
sympathy with her. Here Mr. Bray's many- 
sided mental activity and genial brightness of 
disposition, and his wife's exquisite goodness 
of heart, must have helped to soothe and 
cheer one whose delicately strung nature was 
just then nearly bending under the excessive 
strain of thought and feeling she had gone 
through. One person, indeed, was so struck 
by the grave sadness generally affecting her, 
that it seemed to him as if her coming took 
all the sunshine out of the day. But whether 
grave or gay, whether meditative or playful, 
her conversation exercised a spell over all 
who came within its reach. 

In the pleasant house at Rosehill distin- 
guished guests were constantly coming and 
going, so that there was no lack of the needed 
intellectual friction supplied by clever and 
original talk. Here in a pleasant garden, 
planted with rustling acacia trees, and open- 
ing on a wide prospect of richly wooded, 
undulating country, with the fitful brightness 
of English skies overhead, and a smooth- 
shaven lawn to walk or recline upon, many 
were the topics discussed by men who . had 
made, or were about to make, their mark. 
Froude was known there. George Combe 
discussed with his host the principles. of phre- 



74 



GEORGE ELIOT, 



nology, at that time claiming " its thousands 
of disciples." Ralph Waldo Emerson, on a 
lecturing tour in this country, while on a 
brief visit, made Marian's acquaintance, and 
was observed by Mrs. Bray engaged in eager 
talk with her. Suddenly she saw him start. 
Something said by this quiet, gentle-man- 
nered girl had evidently given him a shock of 
surprise. Afterwards, in conversation with 
her friends, he spoke of her " great calm 
soul." This is no doubt an instance of the 
intense sympathetic adaptiveness of Miss 
Evans. If great, she was not by any means 
calm at this period, but inwardly deeply per- 
turbed, yet her nature, with subtlest response, 
reflected the transcendental calm of the phi- 
losopher when brought within his atmos- 
phere. 

George Dawson, the popular lecturer, and 
Mr. Flower, were more intimately associated 
with the Rosehill household. The latter, 
then living at Stratford-on-Avon, where he 
was wont to entertain a vast number of peo- 
ple, especially Americans, who made pilgrim- 
ages to Shakespeare's birthplace, is known to 
the world as the benevolent denouncer of 
"bits and bearing-reins." One day this whole 
party went to hear George Dawson, who had 
made a great sensation at Birmingham, preach 



TOUR ON THE CONTINENT 75 

one of his thrilling sermons from the text 
"And the common people heard him gladly." 
George Eliot, alluding to these days as late 
as 1876, says, in a letter to Mrs. Bray: 

" George Dawson was strongly associated 
for me with Rosehill, not to speak of the 
General Baptist Chapel, where we all heard 
him preach for the first time (to us). ... I 
have a vivid recollection of an evening when 

Mr. and Mrs. F dineS at your house with 

George Dawson, when he was going to lec- 
ture at the Mechanics* Institute, and you felt 
compassionately towards him, because you 
thought the rather riotous talk was a bad 
preface to his lecture. We have a Birming- 
ham friend, whose acquaintance we made 
many years ago in Weimar, and from him I 
have occasionally had some news of Mr. Daw- 
son. I feared, what y^u mention, that his 
life has been a little too strenuous in these 
latter years." 

On the evening alluded to in this letter 
Mr. Dawson was dining at Mrs. Bray's house 
before giving his lecture on * John Wesley,* at 
the Mechanics* Institute. His rich sarcasm 
and love of fun had exhilarated the whole 
company, and not content with merely " riot- 
ous talk,'* George Dawson and Mr. Flower 
turned themselves into lions and wild cats 



76 



GEORGE ELIOT. 



for the amusement of the children, sud- 
denly pouncing out from under the table- 
cloth, with hideous roarings and screechings, 
till the hubbub became appalling, joined to 
the delighted half-frightened exclamations of 
the little ones. Mr. Dawson did the lions, 
and Mr. Flower, who had made personal ac- 
quaintance with the wild cats in the back- 
woods of America, was inimitable in their 
peculiar pounce and'screech. 

Thus amid studies and pleasant friendly 
intercourse did the days pass at Rosehill. 
Still Marian Evans was restless, tormented, 
frequently in tears, perhaps unconsciously 
craving a wider sphere, and more definitely 
recognized position. .However strenuously 
she, at a maturer time of life, inculcated the 
necessity of resignation, she had not then 
learned to resign herself. And now a change 
was impending — a change which, fraught 
with the most important consequences, was 
destined to give a new direction to the cur- 
rent of her life. Dr. John Chapman invited 
her to assist him in the editorship of the 
Westminster Review, which passed at that 
time into his hands from John Mill. They 
had already met, when Marian was passing 
through London on her way to the Continent, 
on some matter of business or other connected 



TOUR ON THE CONTINENT. 



77 



with one of her translations. Dr. Chapman's 
proposition was accepted ; and although Mar- 
ian suftered keenly from the wrench of part- 
ing with her friends, the prompting to work 
out her powers to the full overcame the 
clinging of affection, and in the spring of 
1 85 1 she left Rosehill behind her and came 
to London. 



CHAPTER V. 

THE 'WESTMINSTER REVIEW.' 

Dr. and Mrs. Chapman were at this time in 
the habit of admitting a few select boarders, 
chiefly engaged in literary pursuits, to their 
large house in the Strand, and Miss Evans, 
at their invitation, made her home with 
them. Thus she found herself at once in the 
centre of a circle consisting of some of the 
roost advanced thinkers and brilliant litt^a- 
teurs of the day ; a circle which, partly con- 
sisting of contributors to the Westminster 
Review, was strongly imbued with scientific 
tendencies, being particularly partial to the 
doctrines of Positive Philosophy. 

Those were in truth the palmy days of the 
Westminster Review, Herbert Spencer, G. 
H. Lewes, Jolin Oxenford, James and Harriet 
Martineau, Charles Bray, George Combe, and 
Professor Edward Forbes were among the 
winters that made it the leading expositor of 
the philosophic and scientific thought of the 
age. It occupied a position something mid- 



THE * WESTMINSTER REVIEW: 79 

way between that of the Nineteenth Century 
and the Fortnightly. Scorning, like the latter, 
to pander to the frivolous tastes of the ma- 
jority, it appealed to the most thoughtful and 
enlightened section of the reading public, giv- 
ing especial prominence to the philosophy of 
the Comtist School; and while not so fash- 
ionable as the Nineteenth Centuryj it could 
boast among its contributors names quite as 
famous, destined as they were to become the 
foremost of their time and country. With 
this group of illustrjdus writers Miss Evans 
was now associated, and the articles she 
contributed from the year 1852 to 1858 are 
among the most brilliant examples of periodi- 
cal literature. The first notice by her pen is 
a brief review of Carlyle's * Life of Sterling' 
for January 1852, and judging from internal 
evidence, as regards style and method of 
treatment, the one on Margaret Fuller, in the 
next number, must be by the same hand. 

To the biographer there is a curious in- 
terest in what she says in her first notice 
about this kind of literature, and it would be 
well for the world if writers were to lay it 
more generally to heart. " We have often 
wished that genius would incline itself more 
frequently to the task of the biographer, that 
when some great or good personage dies, in- 



8o GEORGE ELIOT. 

stead of the dreary three- or five-volumed com- 
pilations of letter, and diary, and detail, little 
to the purpose, which two-thirds of the public 
have not the chance, nor the other third the 
inclination, to read, we could have a real 
*life,' setting forth briefly and vividly the 
man's inward and outward struggles, aims, 
and achievements, so as to make clear the 
meaning which his experience has for his feU 
lows. A few such lives (chiefly autobiogra- 
phies) the world possesses, and they have, 
perhaps, been more influential on the forma- 
tion of character than any other kind of read- 
ing." Then again, speaking of the ' Memoirs 
of Margaret Fuller,' she remarks, in reference 
to the same topic, ^ The old-world biographies 
present their subjects generally as broken 
fragments of humanity, noticeable because of 
their individual peculiarities, the new-world 
biographies present their subjects rather as 
organic portions of society." 

George Eliot's estimate of Margaret Fuller 
(for there can be little doubt that it is hers) 
possesses too rare an interest for readers not 
to be given here in her own apposite and 
pungent words: *'We are at a loss whether 
to regard her sis the parent or child of New 
England Transcendentalism. Perhaps neither 
the one nor the other. It was essentially an 



THE 'WESTMINSTER REVIEW: 8 1 

intellectual, moral, spiritual regeneration — a 
renewing of the whole man — a kindling of 
his aspirations after full development of fac- 
ulty and perfect symmetry of being. Of this 
sect Margaret Fuller was the priestess. In 
conversation she was as copious and oracular 
as Coleridge, brilliant as Sterling, pungent 
and paradoxical as Carlyle ; gifted with the 
inspired powers of a Pythoness, she saw into 
the hearts and over the heads of all who came 
near her, and, but for a sympathy as bounds 
less as her self-esteem, she would have de- 
spised the whole human race! Her frailty 
in this respect was no secret either to herself 
or her friends. . . . We must say that from 
the time she became a mother till the final 
tragedy when she perished with her husband 
and child within sight of her native shore, she 
was an altered woman, and evinced a great- 
ness of soul and heroism of character so grand 
and subduing, that we feel disposed to extend 
to her whole career the admiration and sym- 
pathy inspired by the closing scenes. 

" While her reputation was at its height in 
the literary circles of Boston and New York, 
she was so self-conscious that her life seemed 
to be. a studied act, rather than a spontaneous 
growth ; but this was the mere flutter on the 

surface ; the well was deep, and the spring 

6 



82 GEORGE ELIOT, 

genuine ; and it is creditable to her friends, 
as well as to herself, that such at all times was 
their belief." 

In this striking summing-up of a character, 
the penetrating observer of human nature — 
taking in at a glance and depicting by a few 
masterly touches all that helps to make up a 
picture of the real living being — begins to 
reveal herself. 

These essays in the Westminster Review 
are not only capital reading in themselves, 
but are, of course, doubly attractive to us 
because they let out 'opinions, views, judg- 
ments of things and authors, which we should 
never otherwise have known. Marian Evans 
had not yet hidden herself behind the mask 
of George Eliot, and in many of these wise 
and witty utterances of hers we are admitted 
behind the scenes of her mind, so to speak, 
and see her in her own undisguised person — 
before she had assumed^the rdle of the nov- 
elist, showing herself to the world mainly 
through her dramatic impersoftations. 

In these articles, written in the fresh ma- 
turity of her powers, we learn what George 
Eliot thought about many subjects. We learn 
who were her favorite authors in fiction ; what 
opinions she held on art and poetry ; what 
was her attitude towards the political and 



THE 'WESTMINSTER REVIEW* 83 

social questions of the day ; what was her con- 
ception of human life in general. There is 
much here, no doubt, that one might have 
been prepared to find, but a good deal, too, 
that comes upon one with the freshness of 
surprise. 

A special interest attaches naturally to what 
she has to say about her own branch of art — 
the novel. Though she had probably no idea 
that she was herself destined to become one 
of the great masters of fiction, she had evi- 
dently a special predilection for works of that 
kind, noticeable because hitherto her bent 
might have appeared almost exclusively to- 
wards philosophy. To the three-volume cir- 
culating-library novel of the ordinary stamp 
she is merciless in her sarcasm. One of her 
most pithy articles of this time, or rather 
later, its date being 1856, is directed against 
" Silly Novels by Lady Novelists.*' " These,'* 
she says, " consist of the frothy, the prosy, the 
pious, or th^ pedantic. But it is a mixture of 
all these — a composite order of feminine fa- 
tuity — that produces the largest class of such 
novels, which we shall distinguish as the mind 
and millinery species. We had imagined that 
destitute women turned novelists, as they 
turned governesses, because they had no 
other 'ladylike' means of getting their bread. 



84 GEORGE EUOT. 

Empty writing was excused by an empty 
stomach, and twaddle was consecrated by 
tears. ... It is clear that. they write in elegant 
boudoirs, with violet-colored ink and a ruby 
pen ; that they must be entirely indifferent 
to publishers' accounts ; and inexperienced 
in every form of poverty except poverty of 
brains." 

After finding fault with what she sarcas- 
tically calls the white neckcloth species of 
novel, " a sort of medical sweetmeat for Low 
Church young ladies," she adds, "The real 
drama of Evangelicalism, and it has abun- 
dance of fine drama for any one who has 
genius enough to discern and reproduce it, 
lies among the middle and lower classes. 
Why can we not have pictures of religious 
life among the industrial classes in England, 
as interesting as Mrs. Stowe's pictures of re- 
ligious life among the negroes ? " i ^ • 

She who asked that question was herself 
destined, a few years later, to answer her own 
demand in most triumphant fashion. Already 
here and there we find hints and suggestions 
of the vein that was to be so fully worked 
out in • Scenes of Clerical Life' and 'Adam 
Bede/ Her intimate knowledge of English 
country life, and the hold it had on her imagi- 
nation, every now and then eats its way to 



THE * WESTMINSTER REVIEW: 85 

the surface of her writings, and stands out 
amongst its surrounding matter with a cer- 
tain unmistakable native force. After cen- 
suring the lack of reality with which peasant 
life is commonly treated in art, she makes 
the following apposite remarks, suggested by 
her own experience : " The notion that peas- 
ants are joyous, that the typical moment to 
represent a man in a smock-frock is when 
he is cracking a joke and showing a row of 
sound teeth, that cottage matrons are usually 
buxom, and village children necessarily rosy 
and merry, are prejudices difficult to dislodge 
from the artistic mind which looks for its 
subjects into literature instead of life. The 
painter is still under the influence of idyllic 
literature, which has always expressed the 
imagination of the town-bred rather than the 
truth of rustic life. Idyllic ploughmen are 
• jocund when they drive their team afiekl ; 
idyllic shepherds make bashful love under 
hawthorn bushes ; idyllic villagers dance in 
the chequered shade, and refresh themselves 
not immoderately with spicy nut-brown ale. 
But no one who has seen much of actual 
ploughmen thinks them jocund, no one who 
is well acquainted with the English peasantry 
can pronounce them merry. The slow gaze, 
in which no sense of beauty beams, no humor 



86 GEORGE ELIOT. 

twinkles ; the slow utterance, and the heavy 
slouching walk, remind one rather of that mel- 
ancholy animal the camel, than of the sturdy 
countryman, with striped stockings, red waist- 
coat, and hat aside, who represents the tradi- 
tional English peasant. Observe a company 
of haymakers. When you see them at a 
distance tossing up the forkfuls of hay in the 
golden light, while the wagon creeps slowly 
with its increasing burden over the meadow, 
and the bright green space which tells of work 
done gets larger and larger, you pronounce the 
scene * smiling,' and you think these compan- 
ions in labor must be as bright and cheerful 
as the picture to which they give animation. 
Approach nearer and you will find haymaking 
time is a time for joking, especially if there 
are women among the laborers ; but the coarse 
laugh that bursts out every now and then, and 
expresses the triumphant taunt, is as far as 
possible from your conception of idyllic mer- 
riment. That delicious effervescence of the 
mind which we call fun has no equivalent 
for the northern peasant, except tipsy revelry ; 
the only realm of fancy and imagination for 
the English clown exists at the bottom of the 
third quart pot. 

" The conventional countryman of the stage, 
who picks up pocket-books and never looks 



THE * WESTMINSTER REVIEW: 87 

into them, and who is too simple even to know 
that honesty has its opposite, represents the 
still lingering mistake, that an unintelligible 
dialect is a guarantee for ingenuousness, and 
that slouching shoulders indicate an upright 
disposition. It is quite sure that a thresher 
is likely to be innocent of any adroit arith- 
metical cheating, but he is not the less likely 
to carry home his master's corn in his shoes 
and pocket ; a reaper is not given to writing 
begging letters, but he is quite capable of 
cajoling the dairy-maid into filling his small- 
beer bottle with ale. The selfish instincts 
are not subdued by the sight of buttercups, 
nor is integrity in the least established by 
that classic rural occupation, sheep-washing. 
To make men moral something more is requi- 
site than to turn them out to grass." 

Every one must see that this is the essay 
writing of a novelist rather than of a moral 
philosopher. The touches are put on with 
the vigor of a Vel^fc|nez. Balzac, or Flaubert, 
or that most terrible writer of the modern 
French school of fiction, the author of ' Le 
Sabot Rouge,* never described peasant life 
with more downright veracity. In the eyes 
of Miss Evans this quality of veracity is the 
most needful of all for the artist. Because 
"a picture of human life, such as a great 



88 GEORGE ELIOT, 

artist can give, surprises even the trivial and 
the selfish into that attention*to what is apart 
from themselves, which may be called the 
raw material of sentiment." For " art is the 
nearest thing to life ; it is a mode of ampli- 
fying experience and e3(tending our contact 
with our fellow-men beyond the bounds of 
our personal lot. All the more sacred is the 
task of the artist when he undertakes to paint 
the life of the People. Falsification here is 
far more pernicious than in the more artificial 
aspects of life. It is not so very serious that 
we should have false ideas about evanescent 
fashions — about the manners and conversa- 
tion of beaux and duchesses ; but it is serious 
that our sympathy with the perennial joys 
and struggles, the toil, the tragedy, and the 
humor in the life of our more heavily laden 
fellow-men should be perverted, and turned 
towards a false object instead of a true one." 

George Eliot after>yards faithfully adhered 
to the canons fixed by t|[^critic. Whether 
this consciousness of a moral purpose was 
altogether a gain to her art may be more 
discussed in connection with the analysis of 
her works of fiction. It is only needful to 
point out here how close and binding she 
wished to make the union between ethics and 
aesthetics. 




THE * WESTMINSTER REVIEW,' 89 

Almost identical views concerning funda- 
mental laws of Art are discussed in an equally 
terse, vigorous, and pictorial, manner in an 
article called * Realism in Art : Recent Ger- 
man Fiction/ This article, however, is not 
by George Eliot, but by George Henry Lewes. 
It was published in October, 1858, and ap- 
peared after their joint sojourn in Germany 
during the spring and summer of that year. 
I think that if one carefully compares * Real- 
ism in Art ' with George Eliot's other articles, 
there appears something like a marriage of 
their respective styles in this paper. It seems 
probable that Lewes, with his flexible adaptive- 
ness, had come under the influence of George 
Eliot's powerful intellect, and that many of 
the views he expresses here at the same time 
render George Eliot's, as they frequently ap- 
pear, identical with hers. In the article in 
question the manner as well as the matter has 
a certain suggestion of the novelist's style. 
For example, sh^^quently indicates the qual- 
ity of human speech by its resemblance to 

usical sounds. She is fond of speaking of 
" the staccato tones of a voice," an adagio of 
utter indifference," and in the above-mentioned 
essay there are such expressions as the " stately 
largo " of good German prose. Again, in the 
article in question, we find the following 



( 



90 



GEORGE EUOT. 



satirical remarks about the slovenly prose of 
the generality of German writers : " To be 
gentlemen of somewhat slow, sluggish minds 
is perhaps their misfortune ; but to be writers 
deplorably deficient in the first principles of 
composition is assuredly their fault Some 
men pasture on platitudes, as oxen upon 
meadow-grass ; they are at home on a dead- 
level of common-place, and do not desire to 
be irradiated by a felicity of expression." 
And in another passage to the same effect 
the author says sarcastically, " Graces are 
gifts : it can no more be required of a pro- 
fessor that he should write with felicity than 
that he should charm all beholders with his 
personal appearance; but literature requires 
that he should write intelligibly and carefully, 
as society requires that he should wash his 
face and button his waistcoat." Some of 
these strictures are very similar in spirit to 
what George Eliot had said in her review of 
Heinrich Heine, publishq^BLn 1856, where, 
complaining of the generjucumbrousness of 
German writers, she makes the following 
cutting remark : " A German comedy is like 
a German sentence : you see no reason in its 
structure why it should ever come to an 
end, and you accept the conclusion as an ar- 
rangement of Providence rather than of the 
author." 



THE 'WESTMINSTER REVIEW? 



91 



A passage in this article, which exactly 
tallies with George Eliot's general remarks 
on Art, must not be omitted here. " Art is 
a representation of Reality — a Representa- 
tion, inasmuch as it is not the thing itself, but 
only represents it, must necessarily be limited 
by the nature of its medium. . . . Realism is 
thus the basis of all Art, and its antithesis is 
not Idealism but Falsism. . . . To misrepre- 
sent the forms of ordinary life is no less an 
offence than to misrepresent the forms of 
ideal life : a pug-nosed Apollo, or Jupiter in 
a great-coat, would not be more truly shock- 
ing to an artistic mind than are those senseless 
falsifications of Nature into which incompe- 
tence is led under the pretence of ' beautify- 
ing* Nature. Either give us true peasants 
or leave them untouched ; either paint no 
drapery at all, or paint it with the utmost 
fidelity ; either keep your people silent, or 
make them speak the idiom of their class." 

Among Germ4h.iiovelists (or rather writers 
of short stories), Paul Heyse is one of the few 
who is singled *out for special praise in this 
review. And it is curious that there should 
be a tale by this eminent author called * The 
Lonely Ones' (which also appeared in 1858), 
in which an incident occurs forcibly recalling 
the catastrophe of Grandcourt's death in * Dan- 



92 



GEORGE ELIOT. 



iel Deronda:' the incident — although unskil- 
fully introduced — of a Neapolitan fisherman 
whose momentary murderous hesitation to 
rescue his drowning friend ends in lifelong 
remorse for his death. 

What makes the article in question particu- 
larly interesting are the allusions to the Ger- 
man tour, which give it an almost biographical 
interest. As has been mentioned already, Mr. 
Lewes and George Eliot were travelling in 
Germany in the spring of 1858, and in a letter 
to a friend she writes : " Then we had a deli- 
cious journey to Salzburg, and from thence 
through the Salz-Kammergut to Vienna, from 
Vienna to Prague, and from Prague to Dres- 
den, where we spent our last six weeks in 
quiet work and quiet worship of the Ma- 
donna." And in his essay on Art Mr. G. H. 
Lewes alludes to the most priceless art-treas- 
ure Dresden contains, " Raphael's marvellous 
picture, the Madonna di San Sisto," as fur- 
nishing the most perfect illustration of what 
he means by Realism and Idealism. Speak- 
ing of the child Jesus he says : " In the never- 
to-be-forgotten divine babe, we have at once 
the intensest realism of presentation with the 
highest idealism of conception : the attitude 
is at once grand, easy, and natural ; the face 
is that of a child, but the child is divine : in 



THE 'WESTMINSTER REVIEW,' 9^ 

those eyes and in that brow there is an in- 
definable something which, greater than the 
expression of the angels, grander than that of 
pope or saint, is to all who see it a perfect 
truth; we feel that humanity in its highest 
conceivable form is before us, and that to 
transcend such a form would be to lose sight 
of the human nature there represented." A 
similar passage occurs in 'The Mill on the 
Floss,' where Philip Wakem says : " The great- 
est of painters only once painted a myste- 
riously divine xhild ; he could n*t have told 
how he did it, and we can't tell why we feel 
it to be divine." 

Enough has probably been quoted from 
George Eliot's articles to give the reader 
some idea of her views on art. But they are 
so rich in happy aphorisms, originality of illus- 
tration, and raciness of epithet that they not 
only deserve attentive study because they were 
the first fruits of the mind that afterwards 
gave to the world such noble and perfect 
works as ' The Mill on the Floss ' and ' Silas 
Marner,' but are well wo^th attention for their 
own sake. Indeed nothing in George Eliot's 
fictions excels the style of these papers. And 
what a clear, incisive, masterly style it was ! 
Her prose in those days had a swiftness of 
movement, an epigrammatic felicity, and a 



94 



GEORGE EUOT. 



brilliancy of antithesis which we look for in 
vain in the over-elaborate sentences and* some- 
what ponderous wit of * Theophrastus Such/ 

A very vapid paper on 'Weimar and its 
Celebrities/ April 1859, which a writer in the 
Academy attributes to the same hand, I know 
not on what authority, does not possess a 
single attribute that we are in the habit of 
associating with the writings of George Eliot. 
That an author who, by that time, had already 
produced some of her very finest work, namely, 
the * Scenes* of Clerical Life,' and ' Adam 
Bede/ should have been responsible simulta- 
neously for the trite common-places ventilated 
in this article is simply incredible. It is true 
that Homer is sometimes found nodding, and 
the right-hand of the greatest master may for- 
get its cunning, but would George Eliot in her 
most abject moments have been capable of 
penning such a sentence as this in connection 
with Goethe } " Would not Fredricka or Lili 
have been a more genial companion than 
Christina Vulpius for that gre^t poet of whom 
bis native land is so justly proud } " It is not 
worth while to point out other platitudes such 
as flow spontaneously from the facile pen of a 
penny-a-liner ; but the consistent misspelHng 
of every name may be alluded to in passing. 
Thus we read " Lily " for " Lely," " Zetter " 



THE * WESTMINSTER REVIEW: 95 

for " Zelter," " Quintus Filein " for " Fixlein," 
" Einsedel " for " Einsiedel," etc. etc. This in 
itself would furnish no conclusive argument, 
supposing George Eliot to have been on the 
Continent and out of the way of correcting 
proofs. But as it happened she was in Eng- 
land in April 1859, and it is, therefore, on all 
grounds impossible that this worthless pro- 
duction should be hers. 

Perhaps her two most noteworthy articles 
are the one called ' Evangelical Teaching,' 
published in 1855, and the other on * World- 
liness and Other- Worldliness,' which appeared 
in 1857. This happy phrase, by the way, was 
first used by Coleridge, who says, " As there 
is a worldliness or the too much of this life, 
so there is another worldliness or rather other 
worldliness equally hateful and selfish with 
this worldliness^ These articles are curious 
because they seem to occupy a midway posi- 
tion between George Eliot's earliest and latest 
phase of religious belief. But at this period 
she still felt the recoil from the pressure of 
a narrowing dogmatism too freshly not to 
launch back at it some of the most stinging 
shafts from the armory of her satire. Not 
Heine himself, in his trenchant sallies, sur- 
passes the irony with which some of her pages 
are bristling. To ignore this stage in George 



96 GEORGE ELIOT, 

Eliot's mental development would be to lose 
one of the connecting links in her history : 
a history by no means smooth and uneventful, 
as sometimes superficially represented, but 
full of strong contrasts, abrupt transitions, 
outward and inward changes sympathetically 
charged with all the meaning of this transi- 
tional time. Two extracts from the above- 
mentioned articles will amply testify to what 
has just been said. 

" Given a man with a moderate intellect, a 
moral standard not higher than the average, 
some rhetorical affluence and great glibness 
of speech, what is the career in which, with- 
out the aid of birth or money, he may most 
easily attain power and reputation in Eng- 
lish society ? Where is that Goshen of intel- 
lectual mediocrity in which a smattering of 
science and learning will pass for profound 
instruction, where platitudes will be accepted 
as wisdom, bigoted narrowness as holy zeal, 
unctuous egoism as God-given piety? Let 
such a man become an evangelical preacher ; 
he will then find it possible to reconcile small 
ability with great ambition, superficial knowl- 
edge with the prestige of erudition, a middling 
morale with a high reputation for sanctity. 
Let him shun practical extremes, and be ultra 
only in what is purely theoretic. Let him be 



THE * WESTMINSTER REVIEW: 



97 



stringent on predestination, but latitiidina- 
rian on fasting ; unflinching in insisting on 
the eternity of punishment, but diffident of 
curtailing the substantial comforts of time ; 
ardent and imaginative on the pre-millennial 
advent of Christ, but cold and cautious to- 
wards every other infringement of the status 
quo. Let him fish for souls, not with the bait 
of inconvenient singularity, but with the drag- 
net of comfortable conformity. Let him be 
hard and literal in his interpretation only 
when he wants to hurl texts at the heads of 
unbelievers and adversaries, but when the let- 
ter of the Scriptures presses too closely on the 
genteel Christianity of the nineteenth cen- 
tury, let him use his spiritualizing alembic 
and disperse it into impalpable ether. Let 
him preach less of Christ than of Antichrist ; 
let him be less definite in showing what sin 
is than in showing who is the Man of Sin ; 
less expansive oil the blessedness of faith 
than on the accursedness of infidelity. Above 
all, let him set up as an interpreter of proph- 
ecy, rival ' Moore's Almanack ' in the predic- 
tion of political events, tickling the interest 
of hearers who are but moderately spiritual 
by showing how the Holy Spirit has dictated 
problems and charades for their benefit ; and 
how, if they ai;e ingenious enough to solve 

7 



98 GEORGE ELIOT. 

these, they may have their Christian graces 
nourished by learning precisely to whom they 
may point as ' the horn that had eyes/ ' the 
lying prophet/ and the ' unclean spirits/ In 
this way he will draw men to him by the 
strong cords of their passions, made reason- 
proof by being baptized with the name of 
piety. In this way he may gain a metropoli- 
tan pulpit ; the avenues to his church will be 
as crowded as the passages to the opera ; he 
has but to print his prophetic sermons, and 
bind them in lilac and gold, and they will 
adorn the drawing-room table of all evangeli- 
cal ladies, who will regard as a sort of pious 
'light reading' the demonstration that the 
prophecy of the locusts, whose sting is in 
their tail, is fulfilled in the fact of the Turk- 
ish commander having taken a horse's tail 
for his standard, and that the French are the 
very frogs predicted in the Revelations." 

Even more scathing than this onslaught 
on a certain type of the popular evangelical 
preacher, is the paper on the poet Young, 
one of the wittiest things from George Eliot's 
pen, wherein she castigates with all her powers 
of sarcasm and ridicule that class of believers 
who cannot vilify this life sufficiently in order 
to make sure of the next, and who, in the 
care of their own souls, are careless of the 



THE 'WESTMINSTER REVIEW: 



99 



world's need. Her analysis of the 'Night 
Thoughts * remains one of the most brilliant 
criticisms of its kind. Young's contempt for 
this earth, of all of us, and his exaltation of 
the starry worlds above, especially provoke his 
reviewer's wrath. This frame of mind was 
always repulsive to George Eliot, who could 
never sufficiently insist on the need of man's 
concentrating his love and energy on the life 
around him. She never felt much toleration 
for that form of aspiration that would soar to 
some shadowy infinite beyond the circle of 
human fellowship. One of the most epi- 
grammatic passages in this article is where 
she says of Young, " No man can be better 
fitted for an Established Church. He per- 
sonifies completely her nice balance of tem- 
poralities and spiritualities. He is equally 
impressed with the momentousness of death 
and of burial fees ; he languishes at once for 
immortal life and for ' livings ; ' he has a fer- 
vid attachment to patrons in general, but on 
the whole prefers the Almighty. He will 
teach, with something more than official con- 
viction, the nothingness of earthly things; 
and he will feel something more than private 
disgust, if his meritorious efforts in direct- 
ing men's attention to another world are not 

rewarded by substantial preferment iji \hj1fe. 

* • ••• • • • • • 



: • •••• 

c • 



lOO GEORGE EUOT. 

His secular man believes in cambric bands and 
silk stockings as characteristic attire for ' an 
ornament of religion and virtue ; ' he hopes 
courtiers will never forget to copy Sir Robert 
Walpole ; and writes begging letters to the 
king's mistress. His spiritual man recognizes 
no motives more familiar than Golgotha and 
' the skies ; ' it walks in graveyards, or soars 
among the stars. ... If it were not for the 
prospect of immortality, he considers it would 
be wise and agreeable to be indecent, or to 
murder one's father; and, heaven apart, it 
would be extremely irrational in any man not 
to be a knave. Man, he thinks, is a compound 
of the angel and the brute ; the brute is to be 
humbled by being reminded oi its 'relation 
to the stars,' and frightened into moderation by 
the contemplation of deathbeds and skulls ; 
the angel is to be developed by vituperating 
this world and exalting the next, and by this 
double process you get the Christian — * the 
highest style of man.' With all this our 
new-made divine is an unmistakable poet 
To a clay compounded chiefly of the world- 
ling and the rhetorician there is added a real 
spark of Promethean fire. He will one day 
clothe his apostrophes and objurgations, his 
astronomical religion and his charnel-house 
flf^^ity^ in lasting verse, which will stand. 



THE • WESTMINSTER REVIEW: loi 

like a Juggernaut made of gold and jewels, at 
once magnificent and repulsive : for this di- 
vine is Edward Young, the future author of 
the ' Night Thoughts.' " 

It has seemed appropriate to quote thus 
largely from these essays, because, never 
having been reprinted, they are to all intents 
and purposes inaccessible to the general reader. 
Yet they contain much that shQuld not will- 
ingly be consigned to the dust and cobwebs, 
among which obsolete magazines usually sink 
into oblivion. They may as well be specified 
here according to their dates. ' Carlyle*s Life of 
Sterling,' January 1852; 'Woman in France: 
Madame de Sabl6,' October 1854 ; * Evangeli- 
cal Teaching: Dr. Gumming,' October 1855 ; 
* German Wit : Heinrich Heine,' January 
1856; 'Silly Novels by Lady Novelists,* Oc- 
tober 1856; 'The Natural History of Ger- 
man Life,' July 1856; and 'Worldliness and 
Other- Worldliness : the Poet Young,' January 

1857- 
Miss Evans's main employment on the 

Westminster Review was, however, editorial. 
She used to write a considerable portion of 
the summary of contemporary literature at 
the end of each number. But her co-opera- 
tion as sub-editor ceased about the close of 
1853, when she left Dr. Chapman's house, and 



♦. » 



1 02 GEORGE • ELIO T, 



r 



went to live in apartments in a small house 
in Cambridge Terrace, Hyde Park. Marian 
Evans was not entirely dependent at this time 
on the proceeds of her literary work, her 
father having settled the sum of 80/. to lOoL a 
year on her for life, the capital of which, how- 
ever, did not belong to her. She was very 
generous with her money ; and although her 
earnings at this time were not considerable, 
they were partly spent on her poor relations. 



CHAPTER VL 



GEORGE HENRY LEWES. 



Meanwhile, these literary labors were pleas- 
antly diversified by frequent visits to her 
friends at Rosehill and elsewhere. In Octo- 
ber 1852, she stayed with Mr. and Mrs. George 
Combe at Edinburgh, and on her way back 
was the guest of Harriet Martineau, at her de- 
lightfully situated house in Ambleside. Her 
acquaintance with Mr. Herbert Spencer had 
ripened into a cordial friendship. They met 
constantly both in London and in the country, 
and their intercourse was a source of mutual 
intellectual enjoyment and profit. As must 
already have become evident, it is erroneous 
to suppose that he had any share in the for- 
mation of her mind : for as Mr. Herbert 
Spencer said, in a letter to the Daily News, 
" Our friendship did not commence until 185 1 
. . . when she was already distinguished by 
that breadth of culture, and universality of 
power, which have since made her known to 
all the world." 



I04 



GEORGE ELIOT. 



In a letter to Miss Phelps, George Eliot 
touches on this rumor, after alluding in an 
unmistakable manner to another great con- 
temporary : " I never — to answer one of your 
questions quite directly — I never had any 
personal acquaintance with " (naming a prom- 
inent Positivist) ; " never saw him to my 
knowledge, except in the House of Com- 
mons ; and though I have studied his books, 
especially his 'Logic' and 'Political Econ- 
omy,' with much benefit, I have no con- 
sciousness of their . having made any marked 
epoch in my life. 

"Of Mr. 's friendship I have had the 

honor and advantage for twenty years, but 
I believe that every main bias of my mind 
had been taken before I knew him. Like the 
rest of his readers, I am, of course, indebted 
to him for much enlargement and clarifying 
of thought." 

But there was another acquaintance which 
Miss Evans made during the first year of her 
residence in the Strand, destined to affect the 
whole future tenor of her life — the acquaint- 
ance of Mr. George Henry Lewes, then, like 
her, a contributor to the Westminster Review. 

George Henry Lewes was Marian's senior 
by two years, having been bom in London 
on the 1 8th of April, 1817. He was educated 



r 

■i 



GEORGE HENRY LEWES. 105 

at Greenwich in a, school once possessing a 
high reputation for thoroughly " grounding " 
its pupils in a knowledge of the classics. 
When his education was so far finished, he 
was placed as clerk in a merchant's office. 
This kind of occupation proving very dis- 
tasteful, he turned medical student for a time. 
Very early in life he was attracted towards 
philosophy, for at the age of nineteen we find 
him attending the weekly meetings of a small 
club, in the habit of discussing metaphysical 
problems in the parlor of a tavern in Red 
Lion Square, Holborn. This club, fi'om which 
the one in ' Daniel Deronda ' is supposed to 
have borrowed many of its features, was the 
point of junction for a most heterogeneous 
company. Here, amicably seated round the 
fire, a speculative tailor would hob and nob 
with some medical student deep in anatomy ; 
a second-hand bookseller having devoured the 
literature on his shelves, ventilated their con- 
tents for the general benefit ; and a discursive 
American mystic was listened to in turn with 
a Jewish journeyman watchmaker deeply im- 
bued with Spinozism. It is impossible not 
to connect this Jew, named Cohen, and de- 
scribed as " a man of astonishing subtilty 
and logical force, no less than of sweet per- 
sonal worth,'* with the Mordecai of the novel 



I06 GEORGE EUOT. 

just mentioned. However wide the after di- 
vergencies, here evidently lies the germ. The 
weak eyes and chest, the grave and gentle 
demeanor, the whole ideality of character, 
correspond. In some respects G. H. Lewes 
was the " Daniel Deronda " to this " Morde- 
cai." For he not only loved but venerated 
his "great calm intellect" "An immense 
pity," says Mr. Lewes, " a fervid indignation, 
filled me as I came away from his attics in one 
of the Holbom courts, where I had seen him 
in the pinching poverty of his home, with 
his German wife and two little black-eyed 
children." 

To this pure-spirited suffering watchmaker, 
Lewes owed his first acquaintance with Spi- 
noza. A certain passage, casually cited by 
Cohen, awakened an eager thirst for more in 
the youth. The desire to possess himself of 
Spinoza's works, still in the odor of pestilen- 
tial heresy, haunted him like a passion. For 
he himself, then "suffering the social per- 
secution which embitters any departure from 
accepted creeds," felt in defiant sympathy 
with all outcasts. On a dreary November 
evening, the coveted volumes were at length 
discovered on the dingy shelves of a second- 
hand bookseller. By the flaring gaslight, 
young Lewes, with a beating heart, read on 



GEORGE HENRY LEWES. 



107 



the back of a small brown quarto those 
thrilling words, * Spinoza : Opera Posthuma ! ' 
He was poor in those days, and the price of 
the volume was twenty shillings, but he would 
gladly have sacrificed his last sixpence to se- 
cure it. Having paid his money with fever- 
ish delight, he hurried home in triumph, and 
immediately set to work on a translation of 
the ' Ethics,' which, however, he was too im- 
patient to finish. 

This little incident is well worth dwelling 
upon not only as being the first introduction 
of a notable thinker to philosophy, but as 
showing the eager impulsive nature of the 
man. The study of Spinoza led to his pub- 
lishing an article on his life and works in the 
Westminster Review of 1843, almost the first 
account of the great Hebrew philosopher 
which appeared in this country. This article, 
afterwards incorporated in the 'Biographical 
History of Philosophy,' formed the nucleus, 
I believe, of that "admirable piece of syn- 
thetic criticism and exposition," as Mr. Fred- 
eric Harrison calls it ; a work which, accord- 
ing to him, has influenced the thought of 
the present generation almost more than any 
single book except Mr. Mill's ' Logic' 

Before the appearance of either article or 
* History of Philosophy,' Mr. Lewes went to 



I08 GEORGE ELIOT. 

Germany, and devoted himself to the study 
of its language and literature, just brought 
into fashion by Carlyle. Returning to Eng- 
land in 1839, he became one of the most pro- 
lific journalists of the day. Witty, brilliant, 
and many-sided, he seemed pre-eminently 
fitted by nature for a press writer and litUra- 
teur. (His versatility was so amazing, that a 
clever talker once said of him : " Lewes can 
do everything in the world but paint ; and he 
could do that, too, after a week's study.*^ At 
this time, besides assisting in the editorship 
of the Classical Museum, he wrote for the 
Morning Chronicle^ the Athenceum, the Edin-- 
burgh. Foreign Quarterly, British Quarterly^ 
Blackwood, Eraser, and the Westminster Re- 
view. After publishing ' A Biographical His- 
tory of Philosophy,' through Mr. Knight's 
'Weekly Volumes' in 1846, he wrote two 
novels, ' Ranthorpe,' and * Rose, Blanche, and 
Violet,* which successively appeared in 1847 
and 1848. But fiction was not \i\St forte, these 
two productions being singularly crude and 
immature as compared with his excellent phi- 
losophical work. Some jokes in the papers 
about "rant," killed what little life there 
was in ' Ranthorpe.* Nevertheless, Charlotte 
Bronte, who had some correspondence with 
Mr. Lewes about 1847, actually wrote about 



GEORGE HENRY LEWES. 



109 



it as follows : " In reading 'Ranthorpe/ I have 
read a new book, not a reprint, not a reflec- 
tion of any other book, but a nezv book^ 
Another great writer, Edgar Poe, admired it 
no less, for he says of the work: "Ihave 
lately read it with deep interest, and derived 
great consolation from it also. It relates to 
the career of a literary man, and gives a just 
view of the true aims and the true dignity 
of the literary character." 

* The Spanish Drama;' 'The Life of Maxi- 
milian Robespierre, with extracts from his 
unpublished correspondence ; ' * The Noble 
Heart : a Tragedy ; ' all followed in close 
succession from the same inexhaustible pen. 
The last, it was said, proved . also a tragedy 
to the publishers. But not content with 
writing dramas, Mr. Lewes was also ambi- 
tious of the fame of an actor, the theatre 
having always possessed a strong fascination 
for him. Already as a child he had haunted 
the theatres, and now, while delivering a 
lecture at the Philosophical Institution in 
Edinburgh, he shocked its staid habituis not 
a little by immediately afterwards appearing 
on the stage in the character of Shylock : 
so many, and seemingly incompatible, were 
Lewes*s pursuits. But this extreme mobility 
of mind, this intellectual tripping from sub- 



no GEORGE EUOT. 

ject to subject, retarded the growth of his 
popularity. The present mechanical subdi- 
vision of labor has most unfortunately also 
affected the judgment passed on literary and 
artistic products. Let a man once have writ- 
ten a novel typical of the manners and ways 
of a certain class of English society, or 
painted a picture with certain peculiar effects 
of sea or landscape, or composed a poem 
affecting the very trick and language of some 
bygone mediaeval singer, he will be doomed, 
to the end of his days, to do the same thing 
over and over again, ad nauseam. Nothing 
can well be more deadening to any vigorous 
mental life, and Mr. Lewes set a fine example 
of intellectual disinterestedness in sacrificing 
immediate success to the free play of a- most 
variously endowed nature. 

The public too was a gainer by this. For 
the life of Goethe could not have been made 
the rich, comprehensive, many-sided biogra- 
phy it is, had Mr. Lewes himself not tried 
his hand at such a variety of subjects. This 
life, begun in 1845, the result partly of his 
sojourn in Germany, did not appear in print 
until 1855. Ultimately destined to a great 
and lasting success, the MS. of the ' Life of 
Goethe' was ignominiously sent from one 
publisher to another, until at last Mr. David 



GEORGE HENRY LEWES. 1 1 1 

Nutt, of the Strand, showed his acumen ' by 
giving it to the reading world. 

Some years before the publication of this 
biography Mr. Lewes had also been one of 
the founders of that able but unsuccessful 
weekly, the Leader^ of which he was the liter- 
ary editor from 1849 to 1854. Many of his 
articles on Auguste Comte were originally 
written for this paper, and afterwards col- 
lected into a volume for Bohn's series. In- 
deed, after Mr. John Stuart Mill, he is to be 
regarded as the earliest exponent of Positiv- 
ism in England. He not only considered the 
' Cours de Philosophie Positive^ the greatest 
work of this century, but believed it would 
"form one of the mighty landmarks in the 
history of opinion. No one before M. Comte," 
he says, " ever dreamed of treating social 
problems otherwise than upon theological or 
metaphysical methods. He first showed how 
possible, nay, how imperative, it was that 
social questions should be treated on the 
same footing with all other scientific ques- 
tions. This being his object, he was forced 
to detect the law of mental evolution before 
he could advance. This law is the law of 
historical progression." But while Mr. Lewes, 
with his talent for succinct exposition, helped 
more than any other Englishman to dissemi- 



112 GEORGE ELIOT. 

nate tbe principles of Comte's philosophy in 
this country, he was at the same time vio- 
lently opposed to his ' Politique Positive^ with 
its schemes of social reorganization. 

Even so slight a survey as this must show 
the astonishing discursiveness of Mr. Lewes's 
intellect. /By the time he was thirty he had 
already tried his hand at criticism, fiction, 
biography, the drama, and philosophy. He 
had enlarged his experience of human nature 
by foreign travel ; he had addressed audiences 
from the lecturer's platform ; he had enjoyed 
the perilous sweets of editing a newspaper ; 
he had even, it is said, played the harlequin 
in a company of strolling actors. Indeed, Mr. 
Thackeray was once heard to say that it 
would not surprise him to meet Lewes in 
Piccadilly, riding on a white elephant ; whilst 
another wit likened him to the Wandering 
Jew, as you could never tell where he was 
going to turn up, or what he was going to do 
next 

In this discursiveness of intellect he more 
nearly resembled the Encyclopedists of the 
eighteenth century than the men of his own 
time. Indeed his personal appearance, tem- 
perament, manners, general tone of thought, 
seemed rather to be those of a highly accom- 
plished foreigner than of an Englishman. 



GEORGE HENRY LEWES. 



113 



He was a lightly built, fragile man, with 
bushy curly hair, and a general shstgginess 
of beard and eyebrow not unsuggestive of a 
Skye terrier. For the rest, lie had a promi- 
nent mouth and gray, deeply set eyes under 
an ample, finely proportioned forehead. Vol- 
atile by nature, somewhat wild and lawless 
in his talk, he in turn delighted and shocked 
his friends by the gayety, recklessness, and 
genial abandon of his manners and conver- 
sation. His companionship was singularly 
stimulating, for the commonest topic served 
him as a starting-point for the lucid develop- 
ment of some pet philosophical theory. In 
this gift of making abstruse problems intelli- 
gible, and difficult things easy, he had some 
resemblance to the late W. K. Clifford, with 
his magical faculty of illuminating the most 
abstruse subjects by his vivid directness of 
exposition. 

As Lewes's life was so soon to be closely 
united to that of Marian Evans, this cursory 
sketch of his career will not seem inappropri- 
ate. At the time they met at Dr. Chapman's 
house, Mr. Lewes, who had married early in 
life, found his conjugal relations irretrievably 
spoiled. How far the blame of this might at- 
tach to one side or to the other does not con- 
cern us here. Enough that in the intercourse 

8 



114 GEORGE ELIOT. 

with a woman of such astonishing intellect, 
varied acquirements, and rare sympathy, Mr. 
Lewes discovered a community of ideas and 
a moral support that had been sadly lacking 
to his existence hitherto. 

In many ways these two natures, so oppo- 
site in character, disposition, and tone of mind, 
who, from such different starting-points, had 
reached the same standpoint, seemed to need 
each other for the final fruition and utmost 
development of what was best in each. A 
crisis was now impending in Marian's life. 
She was called upon to make her private 
judgment a law unto herself, and to shape 
her actions, not according to the recognized 
moral standard of her country, but in harmony 
with her own convictions of right and wrong. 
From a girl, it appears, she had held inde- 
pendent views about marriage, strongly ad- 
vocating the German divorce laws. On the 
appearance of * Jane Eyre/ when every one 
was talking of this book and praising the 
exemplary conduct of Jane in her famous in- 
terview with Rochester, Marian Evans, then 
only four-and-twenty, remarked to a friend 
that in his position she considered him justi- 
fied in contracting a fresh marriage. And in 
an article on Madame de Sabl^, written as 
early as 1854, there is this significant passage 



GEORGE HENRY LEWES. 115 

in reference to the "laxity of opinion and 
practice with regard to the marriage-tie in 
France." " Heaven forbid," she writes, " that 
we should enter on a defence of French mor- 
als, most of all in relation to marriage ! But 
it is undeniable that unions formed in the 
maturity of thought and feeling, and grounded 
only on inherent fitness and mutual attrac- 
tion, tended to bring women into more intel- 
ligent sympathy with man, and to heighten 
and complicate their share in the political 
drama. The quiescence and security of the 
conjugal relation are, doubtless, favorable to 
the manifestation of the highest qualities by 
persons who have already attained a high 
standard of culture, but rarely foster a passion 
sufficient to rouse all the faculties to aid in 
winning or retaining its beloved object — to 
convert indolence into activity, indifference 
into ardent partisanship, dulness into per- 
spicuity." 

Such a union, formed in the full maturity 
of thought and feeling, was now contracted 
by Marian Evans and George Henry Lewes. 
Legal union, however, there could be none, 
for though virtually separated from his wife, 
Mr. Lewes could not get a divorce. Too little 
has as yet transpired concerning this important 
step to indicate more than the bare outline 



Il6 GEORGE ELIOT, 

of events. Enough that Mr. Lewes appears 
to have written a letter in which, after a full 
explanation of his circumstances, he used all 
his powers of persuasion to win Miss Evans 
for his life-long companion ; that she con- 
sented, after having satisfied her conscience 
that in reality she was not injuring the claims 
of others ; and that henceforth she bore Mr. 
Lewes's name, and became his wife in every 
sense but the legal one. 

This proceeding caused the utmost con- 
sternation amongst her acquaintances, espe- 
cially amongst her friends at Rosehill. The 
former intimate and affectionate intercourse 
with Mrs. Bray and her sister was only grad- 
ually restored, and only after they had come 
to realize how perfectly her own conscience 
bad been consulted and satisfied in the matter. 
Miss Hennell, who had already entered on the 
scheme of religious doctrine which ever since 
she has been setting forth in her printed 
works, " swerved nothing from her own prin- 
ciples that the maintenance of a conventional 
form of marriage (remoulded to the demands 
of the present age) is essentially attached 
to all religion, and pre-eminently so to the 
religion of the future." 

In thus defying public opinion, and forming 
a connection in opposition to the laws of so- 



GEORGE HE^RY LEWES. 117 

ciety, George Eliot must have undergone some 
trials and sufferings peculiarly painful to one 
so shrinkingly sensitive as herself. Conscious 
of no wrong-doing, enjoying the rare happi- 
ness of completest intellectual fellowship in 
the man she loved, the step she had taken 
made a gap between her kindred and herself 
which could not but gall her clinging, womanly 
nature. To some of her early companions, 
indeed, who had always felt a certain awe at 
the imposing gravity of her manners, this 
dereliction from what appeared to them the 
path of duty was almost as startling and un- 
expected as if they had seen the heavens fall- 
ing.4«wi9. 

How far the individual can ever be justified 
in following the dictates of his private judg- 
ment, in opposition to the laws and prevalent 
opinions of his time and country, must remain 
a question no less difficult than delicate of 
decision. It is precisely the point where the 
highest natures and the lowest sometimes 
apparently meet ; since to act in opposition 
to custom may be due to the loftiest motives 
— may be the spiritual exaltation of the re- 
former, braving social ostracism for the sake 
of an idea, or may spring, on the other hand, 
from purely rebellious promptings of an anti- 
social egoism, which recognizes no law higher 



i 



Il8 GEORGE ELIOT. 

than that of personal gratification. At the 
same time, it seems, that no progress could 
well be made in the evolution of society with- 
out these departures on the part of individuals 
from the well-beaten tracks, for even the fail- 
ures help eventually towards a fuller recog- 
nition of what is beneficial and possible of 
attainment Mary Wollstonecraft, Shelley, 
George Sand, the New England Transcen- 
dentalists, with their communistic experiment 
at Brook Farm, all more or less strove to be 
path-finders to a better and happier state of 
society. George Eliot, however, hardly be- 
longed to this order of mind. Circumstances 
prompted her to disregard one of the most 
binding laws of society, yet, while she con- 
sidered herself justified in doing so, her sym- 
pathies were, on the whole, more enlisted in 
the state of things as they are than as they 
might be. It is certainly curious that the 
woman, who in her own life had followed such 
an independent course, severing herself in 
many ways from her past with all its tradi- 
tional sanctities, should yet so often inculcate 
the very opposite teaching in her works — 
should inculcate an almost slavish adherence 
to whatever surroundings, beliefs, and family 
ties a liuman being may be bom to. 
I need only add here that Mr. Lewes and 



GEORGE HENRY LEWES, 



119 



Marian went to Germany soon after forming 
this union, which, only ending by death, gave 
to each what had hitherto been lacking in 
their lives. Many marriages solemnized in a 
church, and ushered in with all the ostenta- 
tion of trousseau, bridesmaids, and wedding 
breakfast, are indeed less essentially such in 
all the deeper human aspects which this rela- 
tion implies, than the one contracted in this 
informal manner. Indeed, to those who saw 
them together, it seemed as if they could 
never be apart. Yet, while so entirely at one, 
each respected the other's individuality, his 
own, at the same time, gaining in strength by 
the contact. Mr. Lewes's mercurial disposi- 
tion now assumed a stability greatly enhanc- 
ing his brilliant talents, and for the first time 
facilitating that concentration of intellect so 
necessary for the production of really lasting 
philosophic work. On the other hand, George 
Eliot's still dormant faculties were roused and 
stimulated to the utmost by the man to whom 
this union with her formed the most mem- 
orable year of his life. /By his enthusiastic \ 
belief in her he gave her the only thing she • 
wanted — a thorough belief in herself. In- 
deed, he was more than a husband : he was, 
as an intimate friend once pithily remarked, 
a very mother to her. Tenderly watching 



I20 GEORGE ELIOT. 

over her delicate health, cheering the grave 
tenor of her thoughts by his inexhaustible 
buoyancy, jealously shielding her from every 
adverse breath of criticism, Mr. Lewes in a 
manner created the spiritual atmosphere in 
which George Eliot could best put forth all 
the flowers and fruits of her genius^ 

In joining her life with that of Mr. Lewes, 
the care of his three children devolved upon 
George Eliot, who henceforth showed them 
the undeviating love and tenderness of a 
mother. One of the sons had gone out to 
Natal as a young man, and contracted a fatal 
disease, which, complicated with some acci- 
dent, resulted in an untimely death. He 
returned home a hopeless invalid, and his 
tedious illness was cheered by the affection- 
ate tenda,nce of her who had for so many 
years acted a mother's part towards him. 



CHAPTER VII. 

SCENES OF CLERICAL LIFE. 

r 
As has already been mentioned, Mr. Lewes 

and Marian went to Germany in 1854, divid- 
ing the year between Berlin, Munich, and 
Weimar. In the latter pleasant little Saxon 
city, on which the mighty influence of Goethe 
seemed still visibly resting, as the reflection 
of the sun lingers in the sky long after the 
sun himself has set, Lewes partly re-wrote 
his ' Life of Goethe.' Here must have been 
spent many delightful days, wandering in 
Goethe's track, exploring the beautiful neigh- 
borhood, and enjoying some of the most cul- 
tivated society in Germany. Several articles 
on German life and literature, afterwards 
published in the Westminster Review^ were 
probably written at this time. The trans- 
lation of Spinoza's ' Ethics ' by George Eliot 
was also executed in the same year. Mr. 
Lewes, alluding to it in * Goethe's Life,' says, 
in a foot-note, " It may interest some readers 
to learn that Spinoza will ere long appear in 



il 



122 GEORGE EUOT, 

English, edited by the writer of these lines.** 
This was a delusive promise, since the trans- 
lation has not yet made its appearance. But 
surely its publication would now be warmly 
welcomed. 

The time, however, was approaching when 
George Eliot was at last to discover where 
her real mastery lay. And this is the way, 
as the story goes, that she discovered it. 
They had returned from the Continent and 
were settled again in London, both actively 
engaged in literature. But literature, unless 
in certain cases of triumphant popularity, is 
perhaps the worst paid of all work. Mr. 
Lewes and George Eliot were not too well 
oflE. The former, infinite in resources, having 
himself tried every form of literature in turn, 
could not fail to notice the matchless power 
of observation, and the memory matching it 
in power, of the future novelist. One day 
an idea struck him. "My dear," he said, 
"I think you could write a capital story." 
Shortly afterwards there was some dinner 
engagement, but as he was preparing to go 
out, she said, " I won't go out this evening, 
and when you come in don't disturb me. I 
shall be very busy." And this was how the 
'Scenes of Clerical Life' came firsts to be 
-written ! On being shown a portion of the 



SCENES OF CLERICAL LIFE. 



123 



first tale, 'Amos Barton/ Mr. Lewes was 
fairly amazed. 

Stories are usually fabricated after the 
event ; but, if not true, they often truly paint 
a situation. And the general testimony of 
friends seems to agree that it was Mr. Lewes 
who first incited the gifted woman, of whose 
great powers he was best able to form a judg- 
ment, to express herself in that species of 
literature which would afford the fullest scope 
to the creative and dramatic faculties which 
she so eminently possessed. Here, however, 
his influence ended. He helped to reveal 
George Eliot to herself, and after that there 
was little left for him to do. But this gift of 
stimulating another by sympathetic insight 
and critical appreciation is itself of priceless 
value. When Schiller died, Goethe said, 
" The half of my existence is gone from me.*' 
A- terrible word to utter for one so great. 
But never again, he knew, would he meet 
with the same complete comprehension, and, 
lacking that, his genius itself seemed less his 
own than before. 

There is an impression abroad that Mr. 
Lewes, if anything, did some injury to George 
Eliot from a literary point of view ; that the 
nature of his pursuits led her to adopt too 
technical and pedantic a phraseology in her 



124 



GEORGE ELIOT. 



noveb. But this idea is unjust to bottu In 
comparing her earliest with her latest style, 
it is clear that from the first she was apt 
to cull her illustrations frpm the physical 
sciences, thereby showing how much these 
studies had become part of herself Indeed, 
she was far more liable to introduce these 
scientific modes of expression than Mr, Lewes, 
as may be easily seen by comparing his * Life 
of Goethe/ partly re-written in 1854, with 
some of her essays of the same date. As to 
her matter, it is curious how much of it was 
drawn from the earliest sources of memory — 
from that life of her childhood to which she 
may sometimes have turned yearningly as 
to a long-lost Paradise, Most of her works 
might, indeed, not inaptly be called * Looking 
Backward,' They are a half-pathetic, half- 
humofous, but entirely tender revivification 
of the "days that are no more." No one, 
however intimate, could really intermeddle 
with the workings of a genius drawing its 
happiest inspiration from the earliest experi- 
ences of its own individual past. 

Nothing is more characteristic of this obvi- 
ous tendency than the fh-st of the * Scenes of 
Clerical Life,' 'The Sad Fortunes of the Rev. 
Amos Barton,' At Chilvers Coton the curi- 
ous in such matters may still see the identical 



SCENES OF CLERICAL LIFE. 



125 



church where the incumbent of Shepperton 
used to preach sermons shrewdly compounded 
of High Church doctrines and Low Church 
evangelicaHsm, not forgetting to note " its 
little flight of steps with their wooden rail 
running up the outer wall, and leading to the 
school-children's gallery/' There they may 
still see the little churchyard, though they 
may look in vain for the " slim black figure " 
of the Rev. Amos, " as it flits past the pale 
gravestones," in "the silver light that falls 
aslant on church and tomb." And among 
the tombs there is one, a handsome substan- 
tial monument, overshadowed by a yew-tree, 
on which there is this inscription : 

HERE LIES, 

WAITING THE SUMMONS OF THE ARCHANGEL'S TRUMPET, 

ALL THAT WAS MORTAL OF 

THE BELOVED WIFE OF THE 

REV. JOHN GWYTHER, B.A., 

CURATE OF THIS PARISH, 

NOV. 4TH, 1836, 

AGED THIRTY-FOUR YEARS, 

LEAVING A HUSBAND AND SEVEN CHILDREN. 

This Emma Gwyther is none other than 
the beautiful Milly, the wife of Amos, so 
touchingly described by George Eliot, whose 
mother, Mrs. Evans, was her intimate friend. 
George Eliot would be in her teens when she 



126 GEORGE ELIOT, 

heard the story of this sweet woman : heard 
the circumstantial details of her struggles to 
make the two ends of a ridiculously small 
income meet the yearly expenses : heard her 
mother, no doubt (in the words of Mrs. 
Hackit) blame her weak forbearance in tol- 
erating the presence in her house of the lux- 
urious and exacting countess, who, having 
ingratiated herself with the gullible Amos 
by her talk jof the " livings " she would get 
him, gave much scandal in the neighborhood : 
heard of the pathetic death-bed, when, worn 
by care and toil, the gentle life ebbed quietly 
away, leaving a life-long void in her hus- 
band's heart and home. All this was the 
talk of the neighborhood when George Eliot 
was a girl ; and her extraordinary memory 
allowed nothing to escapej 

( On tne completion of * Amos Barton,' Mr. 
Lewes, who, as already mentioned, was a 
contributor to *Maga,' sent the MS. to the 
editor, the late Mr. John Blackwood, as the 
work of an anonymous friend. This was in 
the autumn of 185^. The other scenes of 
•Clerical Life 'were then unwritten, but the 
editor was informed that the story submitted 
to his approval formed one of a series. 
Though his judgment was favorable, he 
begged to see some of the other tales before 



SCENES OF CLERICAL LIFE, 127 

accepting this, freely making some criticisms 
on the plot and studies of character in ' Amos 
Barton.' This, however, disheartened the au- 
thor, whose peculiar diffidence had only been 
overcome by Mr. Lewes's hearty commenda- 
tion. When the editor had been made aware 
of the injurious effect of his objections, he 
hastened to efface it by accepting the tale 
without further delay. It appeared soon 
afterwards in Blackwood's Magazine for Jan- 
uary 1857, where it occupied the first place. 
This story, by some considered as fine as 
anything the novelist ever wrote, came to an 
end in the next number. * Mr. Gilfil's Love- 
Story,* and 'Janet's Repentance' were written 
in quick succession, and the series wa^ com- 
pleted in November of the same year. / 

Although there was nothing sufficiently 
sensational in these * Scenes ' to arrest the 
attention of that great public which must be 
roused by something new and startling, lit- 
erary judges were not slow to discern the 
powerful realism with which the author had 
drawn these uncompromising studies from 
life. After the appearance of 'Amos Barton,' 
Mr. Blackwood wrote to the anonymous au- 
thor : " It is a long time since I have read 
anything so fresh, so humorous, and so touch- 
ing. The style is capital, conveying so much 



128 GEORGE ELIOT, 

in so few words." Soon afterwards he began 
another letter : " My dear Amos, I forget 
whether I told you or Lewes that I had 
shown part of the MS. to Thackeray. He 
was staying with me, and having been out at 
dinner, came in about eleven o'clock, when I 
had just finished reading it. I said to him, 
' Do you know that I think I have lighted 
upon a new author, who is uncommonly like 
a first-class passenger.' I showed him a 
•page or two, I think the passage where the 
curate returns home and Milly is first intro- 
duced. He would not pronounce whether it 
came up to my ideas, but remarked afterwards 
that he would have liked to have read more, 
• which I thought a good sign." 

Dickens, after the publication of the 
* Scenes,' sent a letter to the unknown writer 
through the editor, warmly expressing the 
admiration he felt for them. But he was 
strongly of opinion from the first that they 
must have been written by a woman. In the 
meanwhile the tales were reprinted in a col- 
lected form, and they were so successful that 
the editor, writing to Mr. Lewes at the end 
of January 1858, when the book had hardly 
been out a month, was able to say, " George 
Eliot has fairly achieved a literary reputation 
among judges, and the public must follow, 



SCENES OF CLERICAL LIFE. 



129 



although it may talc« time." And in a letter 
to George Eliot herself, he wrote in Febru- 
ary : " You will recollect, when we proposed 
to reprint, my impression was that the series 
had not lasted long enough in the magazine 
to give you a hold on the general public, 
although long enough to make your literary 
reputation. Unless in exceptional cases, a 
very long time often elapses between the two 
stages of reputation — the literary and the 
public. Your progress will be sure, if not so 
quick as we could wish.*' 

While the sketches were being re-issued in 
book form, Messrs. Blackwood informed its 
author that they saw good cause for making 
a large increase in the forthcoming reprint, 
and their anticipations were fully justified by 
its success. All sorts of rumors were abroad 
as to the real author of these clerical tales. 
Misled by a hint, calculated to throw him off 
the real scent, Mr. Blackwood was at first un- 
der the impression that they were the work 
of a clergyman, and this may perhaps have been 
the origin of a belief which lingered till quite 
recently, that George Eliot was the daughter 
of a clergyman, a statement made by several 
of the leading daily papers after her death. 
Abandoning the idea of the clergyman, Mr. 
Blackwood next fixed upon a very different 

9 



130 



GEORGE ELIOT, 



sort of person, to wit, Professor Owen, whom 
he suspected owing to the similarity of hand- 
writing and the scientific knowledge so ex- 
ceptional in a novelist. No less funny was 
the supposition held by others of Lord Lytton 
— who more than once hoaxed the public 
under a new literary disguise — having at last 
surpassed himself in the sterling excellence 
of these tales. Now that Bulwer has gone 
the way of all fashions, it seems incredible 
that the most obtuse and slow-witted of crit- 
ics should have mistaken for a moment his 
high-flown sentimental style for the new au7 
thor's terse, vigorous, and simple prose. 

It was impossible, however, for an author 
to remain a mere nameless abstraction. An 
appellation of some kind became an imper- 
ative necessity, and, during the passage of 
' Mr. Gilfil's Love-Story * through the press, 
the pseudonym of " George Eliot " — a name 
destined to become so justly renowned — was 
finally assumed. 

{ The * Scenes of Clerical Life ' were to 
(jeorge Eliot's future works what a bold, 
spirited sketch is to a carefully elaborated 
picture. All the qualities that distinguished 
her genius may be discovered in this, her first 
essay in fiction. With all Miss Austen's 
matchless faculty for painting commonplace 



SCENES OF CLERICAL LIFE. 



131 



characters, George Eliot has that other nobler 
faculty of showing what tragedy, pathos, and 
humor may be lying in the experience of a 
human soul " that looks out through dull gray 
eyes, and that speaks in a voice of quite ordi- 
nary tones." ) While depicting some common- 
place detail of every-day life, she has the 
power to make her reader realize its close 
relation to the universal life. She never gives 
you the mere dry bones and fragments of 
existence as represented in some particular 
section of society, but always manages to keep 
before the mind the invisible links connecting 
it with the world at large. In ' Mr. Gilfirs 
Love-Story ' there is a passage as beautiful as 
any in her works, and fully illustrating this 
attitude of her mind. It is where Tina, find- 
ing herself deceived in Captain Wybrow, gives 
way to her passionate grief in solitude. 

''While this poor little heart was being 
bruised with a weight too heavy for it, Nature 
was holding on her calm inexorable way, in 
unmoved and terrible beauty. The stars were 
rushing in theif eternal courses ; the tides 
swelled to the level of the last expectant 
weed ; the sun was making brilliant day to 
busy nations on the other side of the swift 
earth. The stream of human thought and 
deed was hurrying and broadening onward. 



132 GEORGE ELIOT. 

The astronomer was at his telescope ; the 
great ships were laboring over the waves ; the 
toiling eagerness of commerce, the fierce spirit 
of revolution, were only ebbing in brief rest ; 
and sleepless statesmen were dreading the 
possible crisis of the morrow. What were 
our little Tina and her trouble in. this mighty 
torrent, rushing from one awful unknown to 
another? Lighter than the smallest centre 
of quivering life in the water-drop, hidden 
and uncared for as the pulse of anguish in the 
breast of the tiniest bird that has fluttered 
down to its nest with the long-sought food, 
and has found the nest torn and empty.*' 

There is rather more incident in this story 
of Mr. Gilfil than in either of the two other 
* Scenes of Clerical Life.* In * Amos Barton ' 
the narrative is of the simplest, as has already 
been indicated ; and the elements from which 
' Janet's Repentance * is composed are as free 
from any complex entanglement of plot. The 
author usually describes the most ordinary 
circumstances of English life, but the power- 
ful rendering of the human- emotions which 
spring from them takes a most vivid hold 
of the imagination : ' Mr. GilfiFs Love-Story,' 
however, seems a little Italian romance dropped 
on English soil. 

It is, in brief, the narration of how Sir Chris- 



SCENES OF CLERICAL LIFE. . 133 

topher Cheverel and his wife, during their resi- 
dence at Milan, took pity on a little orphan girl, 
" whose large dark eyes shone from out her 
queer little face like the precious stones in a 
grotesque image carved in old ivory." Cat- 
erina, or Tina as she is called, taken back 
to Cheverel Manor, grew up under the care 
of the Baronet's wife, to whom she became 
endeared by her exceptional musical talent. 
Sir Christopher had no children, but had 
chosen his nephew. Captain Wybrow, for his 
heir, and planned a marriage between him and 
Miss Assher, the handsome and accomplished 
owner of a pretty estate. Another marriage, 
on which he has equally set his heart, is that 
between his ward Maynard Gilfil, an open- 
eyed manly young fellow destined for the 
Church, and the mellow-voiced, large-eyed 
Tina, for whom he has long nursed an unde- 
clared passion. But alas, for the futility of 
human plans ! Tina, to whom the elegant 
Anthony Wybrow has been secretly profess- 
ing love, suffers tortures of jealousy when he 
and Miss Assher, to whom he has dutifully 
become engaged, come on a visit to Cheverel 
Manor. The treacherous Captain, to lull the 
suspicions of his betrothed, insinuates that 
poor Miss Sarti entertains a hopeless passion 
for him, which puts the poor girl, who gets 



134 



GEORGE ELIOT. 



an inkling of this double-dealing, into a frenzy 
of indignation. In this state she possesses 
herself of a dagger, and as she is going to 
meet the Captain by appointment, dreams of 
plunging the weapon in the traitor's heart. 
But on reaching the appointed spot, she be- 
holds the false lover stretched motionless on 
the ground already — having suddenly died of 
heart disease. Tina's anguish is indescrib- 
able : she gives the alarm to the household, 
but stung by remorse for a contemplated re- 
venge of which her tender-hearted nature was 
utterly incapable, she flies unperceived from 
the premises at night. Being searched for in 
vain, she is suspected of having committed 
suicide. After some days of almost unbear- 
able suspense, news is brought that Tina is 
lying ill at the cottage of a former maid in the 
household. ' With reviving hopes her anxious 
lover rides to the farm, sees the half-stunned, 
unhappy girl, and, after a while, manages to 
remove her to his sister's house. She gradually 
recovers under Mrs. Heron's gentle tendance, 
and one day a child's accidental striking of a 
deep bass note on the harpsichord suddenly 
revives her old passionate delight in music. 
And * the soul that was born anew to music 
was born anew to love.' After a while Tina 
agrees to become Mr. Gilfil's wife, who has 



SCENES OF CLERICAL UFE, 135 

been given the living at Shepperton, where 
a happy future seems in store for the Vicar. 
" But the delicate plant had been too deeply 
bruised, and in the struggle to put forth a 
blossom it died. 

" Tina died, and Maynard GilfiFs love went 
with her into deep silence forevermore." 

Besides this sympathy with the homeliest 
characters and situations, or, more properly 
speaking, springing from it, there already 
runs through these three tales the delicious 
vein of humor irradiating George Eliot's 
otherwise sombre pictures of life with sud- 
den flashes of mirth as of sunlight trembling 
above dark waters. In this depth and rich- 
ness of humor George Eliot not only takes 
precedence of all other distinguished women, 
but she stands among them without a rival 
Hers is that thoughtful outlook on life, that 
infinite depth of observation which, taking 
note of the inconsistencies and the blunders, 
the self-delusions and "fantastic pranks" of 
her fellow-men, finds the source of laughter 
very near to tears; never going out of her 
way for the eccentric and peculiar in human 
nature, seeing that human nature itself ap- 
pears to her as the epitome of all incongruity. 
It is this breadth of conception and unerring- 
n^ss of vision piercing through the external 



136 GEORGE ELIOT. 

and accidental to the core of man's mixed 
nature which give certain of her creations 
something of the life-like complexity of 
Shakespeare's. 

/her power of rendering the idiom and 
manners of peasants, artisans, and paupers, 
of calling up before us the very gestures 
and phrases of parsons, country practition- 
ers, and other varieties of inhabitants of our 
provincial towns and rural districts, already 
manifests itself fully in these clerical stories. 
Here we find such types as Mr. Dempster, 
the unscrupulous, brutal, drunken lawyer; 
Mr. Pilgrim, the tall, heavy, rough-mannered, 
and spluttering doctor, profusely addicted to 
bleeding and blistering his patients ; Mr. Gilfil, 
the eccentric vicar, with a tender love-story 
hidden beneath his rugged exterior ; the large- 
hearted, unfortunate Janet, rescued from moral 
ruin by Mr. Tryan, the ascetic evangelical cler- 
gyman, whose character, the author remarks, 
might have been found sadly wanting in per- 
fection by feeble and fastidious minds, but, 
as she adds, "The blessed work of helping 
the world forward happily does not wait to be 
done by perfect men ; and I should imagine 
that neither Luther nor John Bunyan, for 
example, would have satisfied the modem de- 
mand for an ideal hero, who believes nothing 



SCENES OF CLERICAL LIFE. 



137 



but what is true, feels nothing but what is 
exalted, and does nothing but what is grace- 
ful. The real heroes of God's making are 
quite different : they have their natural heri- 
tage of love and conscience, which they drew 
in with their mother's milk ; they know one or 
two of those deep spiritual truths which are 
only to be won by long wrestling with their 
own sins and their own sorrows ; they have 
earned faith and strength so far as they have 
done genuine work, but the rest is dry, bar- 
ren theory, blank prejudice, vague hearsay." 

George Eliot's early acquaintance with 
many types of the clerical character, and her 
sympathy with the religious life in all its 
manifestations, was never more fully shown 
than in these * Scenes/ In * Janet's Repent- 
ance' we already discover one of George 
Eliot's favorite psychological studies — the 
awakening of a morally mixed nature to a 
new, a spiritual life. This work of regenera- 
tion Mr. Tryan performs for Janet, Felix Holt 
for Esther, and Daniel Deronda for Gwen- 
dolen.y Her protest against the application 
of too lofty a moral standard in judging of 
our fellow-creatures, her championship of the 
" mongrel, ungainly dogs who are nobody's 
pels," is another of the prominent qualities 
of her genius fully expressed in this firstling 



138 GEORGE EUOT. 

work, being, indeed, at the root of her humor- 
ous conception of life. One of the finest bits 
of humor in the present volume is the scene 
in ' Amos Barton,' which occurs at the work- 
bouse, euphemistically called the " College." 
Mr. Barton, having just finished his address 
to the paupers, is thus accosted by Mr. Spratt, 
" a small-featured, small-statured man, with a 
remarkable power of language, mitigated by 
hesitation, who piqued himself on expressing 
unexceptionable sentiments in unexception- 
able language on all occasions. 

" ' Mr. Barton, sir — aw — aw — excuse my 
trespassing on your time — aw — to beg that 
you will administer a rebuke to this boy ; he 
is — aw — aw — most inveterate in ill-behav- 
ior during service-time.' 

" The inveterate culprit was a boy of seven, 
vainly contending against 'candles' at his 
nose by feeble sniffing. But no sooner had 
Mr. Spratt uttered his impeachment than 
Mrs. Fodge rushed forward, and placed her- 
self between Mr. Barton and the accused. 

" * That's my child, Muster Barton,' she ex- 
claimed, further manifesting her maternal in- 
stincts by applying her apron to her offspring's 
nose. ' He's aly's a-findin* faut wi' him, and 
a-poundin' him for nothin'. Let him goo an' 
eat his roost goose as is a-smellin' up in our 



SCENES OF CLERICAL LIFE. 139 

noses while we're a-swallering them greasy 
broth, an* let my boy alooan.' 

" Mr. Spratt's small eyes flashed, and he 
was in danger of uttering sentiments not un- 
exceptionable before the clergyman ; but Mr. 
Barton, foreseeing that a prolongation of this 
episode would not be to edification, said * Si- 
lence ! ' in his severest tones. 

" * Let me hear no abuse. Your boy is not 
likely to behave well, if you set him the ex- 
ample of being saucy.' Then stooping down 
to Master Fodge, and taking him by the 
shoulder, ' Do you like being beaten } ' 

" ' No — a.' 

" * Then what a silly boy you are to be 
naughty. If you were not naughty, you 
would n't be beaten. But if you are naughty, 
God will be angry, as well as Mr. Spratt ; and 
God can burn you forever. That will be 
worse than being beaten.' 

" Master Fodge's countenance was neither 
affirmative nor negative of this proposition. 

" * But,' continued Mr. Barton, * if you will 
be a good boy, God will love ypu, and you will 
grow up to be a good man. Now, let me hear 
next Thursday that you have been a good boy.' 

"Master Fodge had no distinct vision of 
the benefit that would accrue to him from 
this change of courses." 



CHAPTER VIII. 



ADAM BEDE. 



Rarely has a novelist come to bis task with 
such a far-reaching culture, such an intel- 
lectual grasp, as George Eliot We have seen 
her girlhood occupied with an extraordinary 
variety of studies ; we have seen her plunged 
in abstruse metaphysical speculations ; we 
have seen her translating some of the most 
laborious philosophical investigations of Ger- 
man thinkers ; we have seen her again trans- 
lating from the Latin the ' Ethics' of Spinoza ; 
and, finally, we have seen her attracting, and 
attracted by, some of the leaders in science, 
philosophy, and literature. 

Compared with such qualifications who 
among novelists could compete ? What could 
a Dickens, or a Thackeray himself, throw into 
the opposing scale? Lewes, indeed, was a 
match for her in variety of attainments, but 
he had made several attempts at fiction, and 
the attempts had proved failures. When at 
last, in the maturity of her powers, George 



ADAM BEDE. 



141 



Eliot produced 'Adam Bede,' she produced a 
novel in which the amplest results of knowl- 
edge and meditation were so happily blended 
with instinctive insight -into life and charac- 
ter, and the rarest dramatic imagination, as 
to stamp it immediately as one of the great 
triumphs and masterpieces in the world of 
fiction. 

It is worth noticing that in 'Adam Bede* 
George Eliot fulfils to the utmost the demands 
which she had been theoretically advocating 
in her essays. In some of these she had not 
only eloquently enforced the importance of a 
truthful adherence to nature, but had pointed 
out how the arfist is thus in the very van- 
guard of social and political reforms ; as in 
familiarizing the imagination with the real 
condition of the people, he did much towards 
creating that sympathy with their wants, their 
trials, and their sufferings, which would event- 
ually effect external changes in harmony with 
this better understanding. Such had been 
her teaching. And in Dickens she had rec- 
ognized the one great novelist who, in certain 
respects, had painted the lower orders with 
unerring truthfulness. His " Oliver Twists," 
his " Nancys," his " Joes," were terrible and 
pathetic pictures of the forlorn outcasts haunt- 
ing our London streets. And if, as George 



^. 



142 



GEORGE ELIOT. 



Eliot says, Dickens had been able to " give 
us their psychological character, their concep- 
tion of life and their emotions, with the same 
truth as their idiom and manners, his books 
would be the greatest contribution Art has 
ever made to the awakening of social sym- 
pathies." Now George Eliot absolutely does 
what Dickens aimed at doing. She not merely 
seizes the outward and accidental traits of her 
characters : she pierces with unerring vision 
to the very core of their nature, and enables 
us to realize the peculiarly subtle relations 
between character and circumstance. Her 
primary object is to excite our sympathy 
with the most ordinary aspects of human life, 
with the people that one may meet any day in 
the fields, the workshops, and the homes of 
England. Her most vivid creations are not 
exceptional beings, not men or women pre- 
eminently conspicuous for sublime heroism of 
character or magnificent mental endowments, 
but work-a-day folk, 

** Not too fine or good 
For human nature's daily food." 

To this conscientious fidelity of observa- 
tion and anxious endeavor to report the 
truth and nothing but the truth, as of a 
witness in a court of justice, are owing that 
life-like vividness with which ' the scenery 



ADAM BEDE. 



143 



and people in 'Adam Bede' seem projected 
on the reader's imagination. The story, in- 
deed, is so intensely realistic as to have given 
rise to the idea that it is entirely founded on 
fact. That there is such a substratum is 
hardly a matter of doubt, and there have been 
various publications all tending to prove that 
the chief characters in 'Adam Bede' were 
not only very faithful copies of living people, 
but of people closely connected with its author. 
To some extent this is incontrovertible. But, 
on the other hand, there is a likelihood of the 
fictitious events having in their turn been 
grafted on to actual personages and occur- 
rences, till the whole has become so fused 
together as to lead some persons to the firm 
conviction that Dinah Morris is absolutely 
identical with Mrs. Elizabeth Evans, the Der- 
byshire Methodist. Such a supposition would 
help to reconcile the conflicting statements 
respectively made by the great novelist and 
the writers of two curious little books entitled 
* Seth Bede, the Methody, his Life and La- 
bors,* chiefly written by himself, and ' George 
Eliot in Derbyshire,' by Guy Roslyn. 

From these brochures one gathers that 
Hayslope, where the rustic drama of * Adam 
Bede ' unfolds itself, is the village of Ellaston, 
not far from Ashbourne in Staffordshire. 



144 



GEORGE ELIOT. 



This village is so little altered that the trav- 
eller may still see the sign-board of the " Don- 
nithome Arms," and the red brick hall, only 
with windows no longer unpatched. Samuel, 
William, and Robert Evans (the father of the 
novelist) were bom in this place, and began 
life as carpenters, as their father before them. 
Samuel Evans became a zealous Methodist, 
and was rather laughed at by his family in 
consequence, for he says, " My elder brothers 
often tried to tease me ; they entertained 
High Church principles. They told me what 
great blunders I made in preaching and 
prayer ; that I had more zeal than knowl- 
edge/' In this, as in other respects, he is the 
prototype of Seth, as Adam resembles Robert 
Evans, one of the more secular elder brothers, 
only that in real life it was Samuel who mar- 
ried Elizabeth, the Dinah Morris of fiction. 

Much has been written about this Elizabeth 
Evans (the aunt of George Eliot, already 
spoken of) : indeed, her life was one of such 
rare devotion to an ideal cause, that even 
such imperfect fragments of it as have been 
committed to writing by herself or her friends 
are of considerable interest. Elizabeth was 
born at Newbold in Leicestershire, and left 
her father's house when little more than four- 
teen years old. She joined the Methodists in 



ADAM BEDE. 



145 



1797, after which she had entirely done with 
the pleasures of the world and all her old 
companions. " I saw it my duty," she says, 
"to leave off all my superfluities of dress; 
hence I pulled off all my bunches, cut off my 
curls, left off my lace, and in this I found an 
unspeakable pleasure. I saw I could make a 
better use of my time and money than to fol- 
low the fashions of a vain world." While still 
a beautiful young girl, attired in a Quaker 
dress and bonnet, she used to walk across 
those bleak Derbyshire hills, looking so 
strangely mournful in their treeless nudity, 
with their bare stone fences gray against a 
grayer sky. Here she trudged from village 
to village, gathering the poor about her, and 
pouring forth words of such earnest convic- 
tion that, as she says, "Many were brought 
to the Lord." The points of resemblance 
between her career and that of Dinah Morris 
cannot fail to strike the reader, even their 
phraseology being often singularly alike, as 
when Mrs. Evans writes in the short account 
of what she calls her " unprofitable life : " 
" I saw it my duty to be wholly devoted to 
God, and to be set apart for the Masters 
use ; " while Dinah says : " My life is too 
short, and God's work is too great for me 
to think of making a home for myself in 

10 



146 GEORGE ELIOT. 

this world." It must be borne in mind, how« 
ever, that these similarities of expression are 
natural enough when one considers that Dinah 
•is a type of the same old-fashioned kind of 
Methodism to which Mrs. Evans belonged. 
What is perhaps stranger is, that the account 
given by George Eliot of her various meet- 
ings with her aunt, Mrs. Elizabeth Evans, 
should differ considerably from what the lat- 
ter herself remembered or has stated about . 
them. Shortly after the appearance of * Adam 
Bede,* attention had been publicly called to 
the identity of the heroine of fiction with the 
Methodist preacher. This conviction 'was sq 
strong in Wirksworth, that a number of friends 
placed a memorial tablet in the Methodist 
chapel at Wirksworth with the following m- 
scription : 

ERECTED BY GRATEFUL FRIENDS, 

In Iftemorg of 

MRS. ELIZABETH EVANS, 

(known to the WORLD AS "DINAH BEDE") 

WHO DURING MANY YEARS PROCLAIMED ALIKE IN THE 
OPEN AIR, THE SANCTUARY, AND FROM HOUSE 

TO HOUSE, 
THE LOVE OF CHRIST : 

SHE DIED IN THE LORD. MAY 9TH, 1 849; AGED 74 YEARS. 

In order to give a correct notion of the '^ 

amount of truth in her novel, George Eliot 



ADAM BEDE, 147 

wrote in the following terms to her friend 
Miss Hennell on the 7th of October, 1859: 
"I should like, while the subject is vividly 
present with me, to tell you more exactly than' 
I have ever yet done, what I knew of my aunt, 
Elizabeth Evans. My father, you know, lived 
in Warwickshire all my life with him, having 
finally left Staffordshire first, and then Derby- 
shire, six or seven years before he married 
my mother. There was hardly any inter- 
course between my father's family, resident 
in Derbyshire and Staffordshire, and our 
family — few and far between visits of (to 
my childish feeling) strange uncles and aunts 
and cousins from my father's far-off native 
county, and once a journey of my own. as a 
little child, with my father and mother, to see ' 
my uncle William (a rich builder) in Stafford- 
shire — but not my uncle and aunt Samuel, 
so far as I can recall the dim outline of 
things — are what I remember of northerly 
relatives in my childhood. 

"But ^Tien I was seventeen or more — 
after my sister was married, and I was 
m.istress of the house — my father took a 
journey into Derbyshire, in which, visiting 
my uncle and aunt Samuel, who were very 
poor, and lived in a humble cottage at Wirks- 
worth, he found my aunt in a very delicate 



148 GEORGE ELIOT, 

state of health after a serious illness, and, to 
do her bodily good, he persuaded her to re- 
turn with him, telling her that / should be 
very, very happy to have her with me for a 
few weeks. I was then strongly under the 
influence of evangelical belief, and earnestly 
endeavoring to shape this anomalous English- 
Christian life of ours into some consistency 
with the spirit and simple verbal tenor of the 
New Testament. I was delighted to see my 
aunt. Although I had only heard her spoken 
of as a strange person, given to a fanatical 
vehemence of exhortation in private as well 
as public, I believed that I should find sym- 
pathy between us. • She was then an old 
woman — above sixty — and, I believe, had 
for a good many years given up preaching. 
A tiny little woman, with bright, small dark 
eyes, and hair that had been black, I imagine, 
but was now gray — a pretty woman in her 
youth, but of a totally different physical type 
from Dinah. The difference — as you will 
believe — was not simply physical ; no differ- 
ence is. She was a woman of strong natural 
excitability, which I know, from the descrip- 
tion I have heard my father and half-sister 
give, prevented her from the exercise of dis- 
cretion under the promptings of her zeal. 
But this vehemence was now subdued by age 



ADAM BEDE, 



149 



and sickness ; she was very gentle and quiet 
in her manners, very loving, and (what she 
must have been from the very first) a truly 
religious soul, in whom the love of God and 
love of man were fused together. There was 
nothing rightly distinctive in her religious 
conversation. I had had much intercourse 
with pious dissenters before ; the only fresh- 
ness I found in her talk came from the fact 
that she had been the greater part of her life 
a Wesleyan, and though she left the society 
when women were no longer allowed to preachy 
and joined the New Wesleyans, she retained 
the character of thought that belongs to the 
genuine old Wesleyan. I had never talked 
with a Wesleyan before, and we used to have 
little debates about predestination, for I was 
then a strong Calvinist. Here her superiority 
came out, and I remember now, with loving 
admiration, one thing which at the time I 
disapproved ; it was not strictly a conse- 
quence of her Arminian belief, and at first 
sight might seem opposed to it, yet it came 
from the spirit of love which clings to the 
bad logic of Arminianism. When my uncle 
came to fetch her, after sfie had been with us 
a fortnight or three weeks, he was speaking 
of a deceased minister once greatly respected, 
who, from the action of trouble upon him, 



ISO 



GEORGE ELIOT. 



had taken to small tippling, though otherwise 
not culpable. 'But I hope the good man's 
in heaven for all that/ said my uncle. * Oh 
yes/ said my aunt, with a deep inward groan 
of joyful conviction, * Mr. A.'s in heaven, that's 
sure.' This was at the time an offence to 
my stern, ascetic, hard views — how beautiful 
it is to me now ! 

" As to my aunt's conversation, it is a fact 
that the only two things of any interest I 
remember in our lonely sittings and walks 
are her telling me one sunny afternoon how 
she had, with another pious woman, visited 
an unhappy girl in prison, stayed with her all 
night, and gone with her to execution ; and 
one or two accounts of supposed miracles in 
which she believed, ^mong the rest, the face 
with the crown of thorns seen in the glass. 
In her account of the prison scenes I remem- 
ber no word she uttered ; I only remember 
her tone and manner, and the deep feeling I 
had under the recital. Of the girl she knew 
nothing, I believe, or told me nothing, but 
that she was a common, coarse girl, convicted 
of child-murder. The incident lay in my 
mind for years on* years, as a dead germ, 
apparently, till time had made my mind a 
nidus in which it could fructify; it then 
turned out to be the germ of ' Adam Bede.' 



ADAM BEDE. 151 

*' I saw my aunt twice after this. Once I 
spent a day and night with my father in the 
Wirksworth cottage, sleeping with my aunt, 
I remember. Our interview was less inter- 
esting than in the former time ; I think I 
was less simply devoted to religious ideas. 
And once again she came with my uncle to 
see me, when father and I were living at 
Foleshill ; then there was some pain, for I 
had given up the form of Christian belief, and 
was in a crude state of free-thinking. She 
stayed about three or four days, I think. 
This is all I remember distinctly, as matter I 
could write down, of my dear aunt, whom 
I really loved. You see how she suggested 
' Dinah ; * but it is not possible you should 
see, as I do, how entirely her individuality dif- 
fered from * Dinah's.* How curious it seems 
to me that people should think 'Dinah's' 
sermon, prayers, and speeches were copied^ 
when they were written with hot tears as they 
surged up in my own mind ! 

" As to my indebtedness to facts of local 
and personal history of a small kind con- 
nected with Staffordshire and Derbyshire, 
you may imagine of what kind that is, when 
I tell you that I never remained in either of 
those counties more than a few days together, 
and of only two such visits have I more than 



152 GEORGE EUOT. 

a shadowy, interrupted recollection* The de- 
tails which I know as facts, and have made 
use of for my picture, were gathered from 
such imperfect allusion and narrative as I 
heard from my father in his occasional talk 
about old times. 

^ As to my aunt's children or g^ndchildren 
saying, if they did say, that * Dinah ' is a good 
portrait of my aunt, that is simply the vague, 
easily satisfied notion imperfectly instructed 
people always have of portraits. It is not 
surprising that simple men and women, with- 
out pretension to enlightened discrimination, 
should think a generic resemblance consti- 
tutes a portrait, when we see the g^eat public, 
so accustomed to be delighted with mtsrvepre" 
sentations of life and character, which they 
accept as representations, that they are scan- 
dalized when art makes a nearer approach to 
truth. 

*' Perhaps I am doing a superfluous thing 
in writing all this to you, but I am prompted 
to do it by the feeling that in future years 
' Adam Bede,' and all that concerns it, may 
have become a dim portion of the past, and 
that I may not be able to recall' so much of 
the truth as I have now told you." 

Nothing could prove more conclusively how 
powerful was the impression which 'Adam 



ADAM BEDE, 



153 



Bede * created than this controversy concern- 
ing the amount of truth which its characters 
contained. But, as hinted before, it seems 
very likely that some of the doings and say- 
ings of the fictitious personages should have 
been attributed, almost unconsciously, to the 
real people whom they resembled. How quick 
is the popular imagination in effecting these 
transformations came only quite recently un- 
der my notice, when some English travellers, 
while visiting Chiteau d'lf, were taken by the 
guide in perfect good faith to see the actual 
dungeon where Monte Christo was impris- 
oned! Similarly, one would think, that the 
moving sermon preached by Dinah on the 
Green at Hayslope had been afterwards erro- 
neously ascribed to Mrs. Elizabeth Evans. 
But an account recently published in the Cen- 
tury Magazine by one who had long known 
the Evanses of Wirksworth, seems irrecon- 
cilable with such a supposition. According 
to this writer it would appear that besides the 
visits to her aunt at Wirksworth, of which 
George Eliot speaks in the letter just quoted, 
there was one other of which no mention is 
made. This visit, which she paid her cousin, 
Mr. Samuel Evans, occurred in 1842, when 
she remained a week at his house in Wirks- 
worth. The aunt and niece were in the habit 



i 



154 



GEORGE EUOT. 



of seeing each other every day for several 
hours at this- time. They usually met at the 
house of one of the married daughters of 
Mrs. Elizabeth Evans, holding long conversa- 
tions while sitting by themselves in the parlor. 
" These secret conversations/' says the writer 
of the article, " excited some curiosity in the 
family, and one day one of the daughters said, 
* Mother, I can't think what thee and Mary 
Ann have got to talk about so much.' To 
which Mrs. Evans replied : * Well, my dear, I 
don't know what she wants, but she gets me 
to tell her all about my life and my religious 
experience, and she puts it all down in a little 
book. I can't make out what she wants it 
for.' " After her departure, Mrs. Evans is re- 
ported to have said to her daughter, " Oh dear, 
Mary Ann has got one thing I did not mean 
her to take away, and that is the notes of the 
first sermon I preached at EUaston Green." 
According to the same authority, Marian 
Evans took notes of everything people said, 
in her hearing: no hiatter who was speak- 
ing, down it went into the note-book, which 
seemed never out of her hand ; and these 
notes she is said to have transcribed every 
night before going to bed. Yet this habit 
was foreign to her whole character, and the 
friends who knew her most intimately in 



r 



ADAM BEDE. 155 

youth and later life never remember seeing 
her resort to such a practice. Be that as it 
may, there can be no doubt that the novelist 
very freely used many of the circumstances 
connected with her aunt's remarkable career. 
How closely she adhered to nature is shown 
by the fact that in Mrs. Poyser and Bar tie 
Massey she retained the actual names of the 
characters portrayed, as they happened to be 
both dead. Bartle Massey, the village cynic, 
had been the schoolmaster of her father, 
Robert Evans. How accurately the latter, 
together with all his surroundings, was de- 
scribed is shown by the following anecdote. 
On its first appearance * Adam Bede ' was 
read aloud to an old man, an intimate asso- 
ciate of Robert Evans in his Staffordshire 
days. This man knew nothing concerning 
either author or subject beforehand, and his 
astonishment was boundless on recognizing 
so many friends and incidents of his own 
youth portrayed with unerring fidelity. He 
sat up half the night listening to the story in 
breathless excitement, now and then slapping 
his knee as he exclaimed, ** That's Robert, 
that's Robert to the life.'y 

Although Wirksworth^is not the locality 
described in * Adam Bede,' it contains fea- 
tures recalling that quaint little market-town, 



156 GEORGE ELIOT, 

where over the door of one of the old-fash- 
ioned houses may be read the name made, 
illustrious by the inimitable Mrs. Poyser. In 
the neighborhood, too, are " Arkwright's mills 
there at Cromford," casually alluded to by 
Adam Bede ; and should the tourist happen 
to enter one of the cottages of gray stone, 
with blue-washed door and window-frames, he 
may still alight on specimens of Methodism, 
as devout as Seth Bede, eloquently expound- 
ing the latest political event by some prophecy 
of Daniel or Ezekiel. In«short, one breathes 
the atmosphere in which such characters as 
Dinah and Seth actually lived and had their 
being. This uncompromising Realism, so far 
from detracting, only enhances the genius 
of this powerful noveL A thousand writers 
might have got hold of these identical mate- 
rials: a George Eliot alone could have cast 
these materials into the mould of 'Adam 
Bede/ Let any one glance at the account of 
their religious experiences, as g^ven by Eliza- 
beth or Samuel Evans, and he will realize all 
the more strongly how great was the genius 
of her who transfused these rambling, com- 
itionplace effusions into such an artistic whole. 
I have entered so minutely into this question 
of the likeness between the actual characters 
and those in the novel purely on account of 



ADAM BEDE, 



157 



the biographical interest attaching to it. In 
judging of *Adam Bede' as a work of art 
these facts possess next to no importance. 
If we could trace the characters in any one 
of Shakespeare's plays to human beings actu- 
ally connected with the poet, we should con- 
sider such a discovery immensely valuable as 
throwing new light on his own life, though it 
would hardly affect our critical estimate of 
the drama itself. 

So much has been said already about the 
characters in *Adam Bede' in connection, 
with the real people they resemble, that little 
need be added here about them. Dinah Mor- 
ris — the youthful preacher, whose eloquence 
is but the natural, almost involuntary mani- 
festation in words, of a beautiful soul ; whose 
spring of love is so abundant that it over- 
flows the narrow limits of private affection, 
and blesses multitudes of toiling, suffering 
men and women with its wealth of pity, hope, 
and sympathy — was a new creation in the 
world of fiction. Some writer has pointed 
out a certain analogy between the sweet Der- 
byshire Methodist and the gentle pietist whose 
confessions form a very curious chapter of 
*Wilhelm Meister.' But the two characters 
are too dissimilar for comparison. The Ger- 
man heroine is a dreamy, passive, introspec- 



158 GEORGE ELIOT. 

tive nature, feeling much but dbing little; 
whereas the English preacher does not in- 
quire too curiously into the mysteries of her 
faith, but moved by the spirit of its teaching 
goes about actively, participating in the lives 
of others by her rousing words and her acts of 
charity. Only^a woman would or could have 
described just such a woman as this : a woman 
whose heart is centred in an impersonal ideal 
instead of in any individual object of love ; 
whereas a man's heroine always has her ex- 
istence rooted in some personal affection or 
passion, whether for parent or lover, child or 
husband. This makes Dinah less romanti- 
cally interesting than Hetty Sorrel, the beau- 
tiful, kittenlike, self-involved creature with 
whom she is so happily contrasted. George 
Eliot never drew a more living figure than 
this of Hetty, hiding such a hard little heart 
under that soft dimpling beauty of hers. 
Again, I think that only a woman would 
have depicted just such a Hetty as this. 
The personal charms of this young girl are 
drawn in words that have the glow of life 
itself ; yet while intensely conscious of her 
beauty, we are kept aware all the time that, 
to use one of the famous Mrs. Poyser's epi- 
grammatic sayings, Hetty is " no better nor a 
cherry wi' a hard stone inside it." George 



w 



ADAM BEDE. 



159 



Eliot is never dazzled or led away by her own 
bewitching creation as a man would have 
been. There is a certain pitilessness in her 

• 

analysis of Hetty's shallow, frivolous little 
soul, almost as if she were saying — See here, 
what stuff this beauty which you adore is 
made of in reality ! To quote her own subtle, 
far-reaching interpretation of beauty : " Het- 
ty's face had a language that transcended 
her feelings. There are faces which nature 
charges with a meaning and pathos not be- 
longing to the simple human soul that flutters 
beneath them, but speaking the joys and sor- 
rows of foregone generations ; eyes that tell 
of deep love which doubtless has been and is 
somewhere, but not paired with these eyes, 
perhaps paired with pale eyes that can say 
nothing, just as a national language may be 
instinct with poetry unfelt by the lips that 
use it." 

The sensation created by * Adam Bede' was 
shown in other ways besides the claim of 
some to have discovered the original characters 
of this striking novel. The curiosity of the 
public was naturally much exercised as to 
who the unknown author could possibly be, 
who had so suddenly leaped into fame. And 
now there comes on the scene an individual 
who does not claim to be the living model of 



l6o GEORGE ELIOT. 

one of the characters portrayed, but to be 
the author of the book himself. And the 
name of this person was Liggins ! 

While the * Scenes of Clerical Life ' were 
yet appearing in Blackwood's Magazine the 
inhabitants of Nuneaton and its neighbor- 
hood were considerably perplexed and excited 
to find well-known places and persons touched 
off to the life. In Amos Barton they recog- 
nized the incumbent of Coton Church, in Mr. 
Pilgrim a medical man familiar to every child 
in the town, and indeed in every one of the 
characters an equally unmistakable portrait. 
Clearly no one but a fellow-townsman could 
have hit off these wonderful likenesses. Liter- 
ary talent not being too abundant, their choice 
of an author was limited. The only man 
who by any stretch of imagination seemed to 
have the making of a man of letters in him 
was this above-mentioned Liggins. To have 
studied at Cambridge, gallantly run through 
a fortune, and be in very needy circum- 
stances, were exactly the qualifications to be 
expected in a man of genius. Further evi- 
dence seeming unnecessary, the real author- 
ship of the * Scenes ' was now revealed in an 
Isle of Man paper. At first the reputed 
author gently denied the impeachment, but 
on the appearance of * Adam Bede ' he sue- 



ADAM BEDE. i6i 

cumbed to the temptation. To be ffited at 
dinner parties as a successful author, and to 
have a subscription set on foot by enthusi- 
astic lady-admirers and fellow-townsmen, in 
whose eyes he was a sadly unrequited genius, 
proved irresistible. A local clergyman even 
wrote to the Times stating Liggins to be the 
real surname of " George Elrot" ! The latter 
wrote, of course, denying the statement, and 
challenging the pretender to produce some 
specimen of his writing in the style of * Adam 
Bede/ But the confidence of the Nuneaton 
public in their hero Liggins was not to be so 
easily shaken. Two dissenting ministers from 
Coventry went over to Attleborough to call 
upon the " great author," and to find out if 
he really did write 'Adam Bede.' Liggins 
evaded 'their questions, indirectly admitting 
that he did ; but when they asked him point 
blank, " Liggins, tell us, did you write ' Adam 
Bede ' .? " he said, " If I didn't, the devil did ! " 
and that was all they could get out of him. 
Another clergyman was much less sceptical, 
assuring every one that he was positive as to 
Liggins being the author, as he had seen the 
MS. of * Adam Bede' in his hands. To this 
day there lives in the Isle of Man a certain 
venerable old gentleman who has never lost 

his faith in Liggins, but, when George Eliot 

II 



l62 GEORGE ELIOT. 

is mentioned, gravely shakes his head, im- 
plying that there is more in the name than 
meets ,the eye of the superficial observer. But 
a heavy retribution befell the poor pseudo- 
author at last, for when his false pretences 
to favor were fully manifest he fell into utter 
neglect and poverty, ending his days in the 
workhouse. 

This foolish misrepresentation hastened the 
disclosure of George Eliot's real personality 
and name, which occurred on the publication 
of 'The Mill on the Floss/ Shortly before 
that, Mr. Blackwood, who had long enter- 
tained the wish to know the author of the 
' Scenes of Clerical Life ' and of * Adam 
Bede,' was invited by Lewes to meet him at 
last No one was present at the dinner-table 
besides Mr. Lewes, Marian, and Mr. Black- 
wood himself. The dinner was an extremely 
pleasant one, but when it was over, the guest 
could not help expressing his regret that 
George Eliot himself should not have been 
present. "Here he is," said Lewes, intro- 
ducing the quiet, low-spoken lady who had 
presided at table, not without enjoyment at 
the sensation he produced as the astonished 
publisher shook hands with his contributor. 



CHAPTER IX. 

THE MILL ON THE FLOSS. 

While the public had been trying to discover 
who the mysterious George Eliot could pos- 
sibly be, one person there was who immedi- 
ately penetrated the disguise, and felt positive 
as to the identity of the author. On reading 
the ' Scenes ' and especially * Adam Bede,' he 
was convinced that no one but a member of 
his own family could have written these sto- 
ries. He recognized incidents, touches, a 
saying here or there, just the things that no 
one outside his own home could by any 
chance have come upon. But George Eliot's 
brother kept this discovery closely locked 
within his own breast He trembled lest 
any one else should discover the secret, 
fearing the outcry of neighbors who might 
not always feel that the author had repre- 
sented them in colors sufficiently flattering. 

When * The Mill on the Floss ' appeared, 
however, the veil was lifted, and people heard 
that George Eliot had once been a Miss 



1 64 GEORGE ELIOT. 

Marian Evans, who came from the neighbor- 
hood of Nuneaton in Warwickshire. To her 
brother Isaac alone this was no news, as he 
had detected his sister in the first of the 
' Scenes/ The child-life of Tom and Mag- 
gie TuIHver was in many respects an auto- 
biography ; and no biographer can ever hope 
to describe the early history of George Eliot 
as she herself has done in ' The Mill on the 
Floss/ How many joys and griefs of those 
happy careless days must have been recalled 
to her brother — those days when little Mary 
Ann had sat poring over Daniel Defoe's ' His- 
tory of the Devil ' — or sought refuge in the 
attic at Griff House, after a quarrel with him : 
" This attic was Maggie's favorite retreat on a 
wet day, when the weather was not too cold ; 
here she fretted out all her ill-humors, and 
talked aloud to the worm-eaten floors and the 
worm-eaten shelves, and the dark rafters fes- 
tooned with cobwebs ; and here she kept a 
Fetish which she punished for all her mis- 
fortunes. This was the trunk of a large 
wooden doll, which once stared with the 
roundest of eyes above the reddest of cheeks, 
but was now entirely defaced by a long career 
of vicarious suffering. Three nails driven 
into the head commemorated as many crises 
in Maggie's nine years of earthly struggle, 



r 



THE MILL ON THE FLOSS, 165 

that luxury of vengeance having been sug- 
gested to her by the picture of Jael destroy- 
ing Sisera in the old Bible." 

Again, at some fields' distance from their 
old home there had been a " Round Pool " 
called " The Moat/' " almost a perfect round, 
framed in with willows and tall reeds, so that 
the water was only to be seen when you got 
close to the brink. This was a favorite re- 
sort of Isaac and Mary Ann, as also of Tom 
and his sister when they went fishing to- 
gether, and " Maggie thought it probable that 
the small fish would come to her hook and 
the large ones to Tom's." The '* Red Deeps," 
too, where Maggie loved to walk in June, 
when the " dog-roses were in their glory," 
and where she lived through many phases of 
her shifting inner life, was in the same vici- 
nity, and at one time a beloved haunt of the 
future novelist. 

But although some of the spots mentioned 
in * The Mill on the Floss ' have been easily 
identified as connected with George Eliot's 
early home, the scenery of that novel is mainly 
laid in Lincolnshire. St. Oggs, with " its red- 
fluted roofs and broad warehouse gables," 
is the ancient town of Gainsborough. The 
Floss is a tidal river like the Trent, and in 
each case the spring-tide, rushing up the river 



l66 GEORGE ELIOT. 

with its terrific wave and flooding the land 
for miles round, is known as the Eagre, a 
name not a little descriptive of the thing 
itself. 

' The Mill on the Floss ' (a title adopted by 
the author at the suggestion of Mr. Black- 
wood in preference to * Sister Maggie ') is the 
most poetical of George Eliot's novels. The 
great Floss, hurrying between green pastures 
to the sea, gives a unity of its own to this 
story, which opens to the roar of waters, the 
weltering waters which accompany it at the 
close. It forms the elemental background 
which rounds the little lives of the ill-starred 
family group nurtured on its banks. The 
childhood of Tom and Maggie TuUiver is 
inextricably blended with this swift river, the 
traditions of which have been to them as 
fairy tales ; its haunting presence is more or 
less with them throughout their chequered 
existence ; and when pride and passion, when 
shame and sorrow, have divided the brother 
and sister, pursued as by some tragic fate, the 
Floss seems to rise in sympathy, and sub- 
merges them in its mighty waters to unite 
them once more " in an embrace never to be 
parted.*' It cannot fail to strike the reader 
that in almost every one of George Eliot's 
novels there occurs a death by drowning : as in 



r- 



THE MILL ON THE FLOSS. 167 

the instance of Thias Bede, of Dunstan Cass, 
of Henleigh Grandcourt, and nearly in that of 
Tito. This may be accounted for by the fact 
that as a child the novelist became acquainted 
with the sudden death of a near relative who 
had accidentally fallen into a stream : an in- 
cident which sunk deeply into her retentive 
mind. 

Fate piays a very conspicuous part in this 
as in most of George Eliot's novels. But it 
is not the Fate of the Greeks, it is not a 
power that affects human existence from 
without : it rather lies at the root of it, more 
or less shaping that existence according to 
obscure inherited tendencies, and in the col- 
lision between character and circumstance, 
between passion and law, potent only in 
proportion as the individual finally issues 
conquered or a conqueror from the struggle 
of life. This action of character on circum- 
stance and of circumstance on character is 
an ever-recurring motif with George Eliot. 
We constantly see adverse circumstances 
modifying and moulding the lives of the 
actors in her stories. She has hardly, if 
ever, therefore, drawn a hero or heroine, for 
these, instead of yielding, make circumstances 
yield to them. Dorothea and Lydgate, in 
abandoning their striving after the highest 



l68 GEORGE ELIOT. 

kind of life ; Tito in invariably yielding to 
the most pleasurable pron>pting of the mo- 
ment ; Gwendolen in being mainly influenced 
by circumstances acting on her, without her 
reacting on them, are all types of this kind. 

Maggie belongs/ on the whole, to the same 
t)rpe. She, too, is what Goethe calls a prob- 
lematic nature, a nature which, along with 
vast possibilities and lofty aspirations, lacks 
a certain fixity of purpose, and drifting help- 
lessly from one extreme to another, is shat- 
tered almost as soon as it has put out of port. 
In Maggie's case this evil springs from the 
very fulness of her nature ; from the acute- 
ness of an imagination which the many-sided- 
ness of life attracts by turns in the most 
opposite directions. Tom, on the other hand, 
with his narrow practical understanding, en- 
tirely concentrated on the business in hand, 
swerves neither to right nor left, because he 
may be said to resemble a horse with blinkers, 
in that he sees only the road straight ahead. 
Maggie, with all her palpable weaknesses and 
startling inconsistencies, is the most adorable 
of George Eliot's women. In all poetry and 
fiction there is no child more delicious than 
the " little wench " with her loving heart and 
dreamy ways, her rash impulses and wild 
regrets, her fine susceptibilities and fiery jets 



r 






THE MILL ON THE FLOSS, 169 

of temper — in a word, her singularly fresh 
and vital nattire. The same charm pervades 
every phase of her life. In her case the child, 
if I may so far modify Wordsworth's famous 
saying, is eminently the mother of the wo- 

)J Profoundly affectionate by nature, and sym- 
Ipathizing as she does with her father in his 
calamity, she cannot help rebelling at the sor- 
did narrowness of her daily life, passionately 
craving for a wider field wherein to develop 
ler inborn faculties. In this state of yearn- 
ing and wild unrest, her accidental reading of 
Thomas k Kempis forms a crisis in her life, 
by bringing about a spiritual awakening in 
which Christianity, for the first time, becomes 
a living truth to her. Intense as she is, 
Maggie now throws all the ardor of her na- 
ture into renunciation and self-conquest. She 
seeks her highest satisfaction in abnegation 
of all personal desire, and in entire devotion 
to others. In her young asceticism she re- 
linquishes a world of which she is ignorant, 
stifling every impulse, however innocent, that 
seems opposed to her new faith. 

But Maggie has more actual affinity with, 
poets and artists than with saints and mar- 
tyrs. Her soul thrills like a finely touched 
instrument to the beauty of the world around 



I70 GEORGE ELIOT. 

her, and though she doubts whether there 
may not even be a sinfulness in the indul- 
gence of this enjoyment, yet the summer 
flowers and the summer sunshine put her 
scruples to flight. And then, when, through 
the intervention of Philip Wakem, the en- 
chantments of romance and poetry are brought 
within her reach,^ the glory of the world again 
lays hold of her imagination, and a fresh con- 
flict is begun in her soul. Thus she drifts 
from one state into another most opposed to 
it, and to an outside observer, such as Tom, 
her abrupt transitions are a sign that shfe is 
utteriy wanting in moral stamina. 

Not only Tom, but many eminent critics, 
who have descanted with fond partiality on 
Maggie's early life, seem to be shocked by 
that part of her story in which she allows 
herself to fall passionately in love with such 
an ordinary specimen of manhood as Stephen 
Guest. The author has even been accused 
of violating the truth of Nature, inasmuch as 
such a high-minded woman as Maggie could 
never have inclined to so vulgar, so common- 
place a man as her lover. Others, while not 
questioning the truth of the character, find 
fault with the poor heroine herself, whom they 
pronounce an ineffective nature revealing its 
innate unsoundness by the crowning error of 



THE MILL ON THE FLOSS. 171 

an abject passion for so poor a creature as 
the dandy of St. Oggs. This contention orjy 
proves the singular vitality of the character 
itself, and nothing is more psychologically 
true in George Eliot's studies of character 
than this love of the high-souled heroine for 
a man who has no corresponding fineness of 
fibre in his nature, his attraction lying en- 
tirely in the; magnetism of mutual passion. 
This vitality places Maggie Tulliver by the 
side of the Juliets, the Mignons, the Con- 
suelos, the Becky Sharps, and other airy in- 
heritors of immortality. It is curious that 
Mr. Swinburne, in view of such a character 
as this, or, indeed, bearing in mind a Silas 
Marner, a Dolly Winthrop, a Tito, and other 
intrinsically living reproductions of human 
nature, should describe George Eliot's as in- 
tellectually constructed characters in contrast 
to Charlotte Bronte s creations, the former, 
according to him, being the result of intellect, 
the latter of genius. If ever character came 
simply dropped out of the mould of Nature it 
is that of Maggie. His assumption, that ' The 
Mill on the Floss ' can in any sense have 
been suggested by, or partially based upon, 
Mrs. Gaskell's story of 'The Moorland Cot- 
tage,' seems equally baseless. There is cer- 
tainly the identity of name in the heroines, 



1/2 



GEORGE EUOT. 



and some resemblance of situation as regards 
portions of the story, but both the name and 
the situation are sufficiently common not to 
excite astonishment at such a coincidence. 
Had George Eliot really known of this tale — 
a tale feebly executed at the best — she would 
obviously have altered the name so as not to 
make her obligation too patent to the world. 
As it is, she was not a little astonished and 
even indignant, on accidentally seeing this 
opinion stated in some review, and posi- 
tively denied ever having seen the story in 
question. 

Indeed* when one knows how this story 
grew out of her own experience, how its 
earlier portions especially are a record of her 
own and her brother's childhood — how even 
Mrs. Glegg and Mrs. Pullet were only too 
faithfully done from the aunts of real life, one 
need not go far afield to seek for its origin. 
Every author usually writes one book, which 
he might more or less justly entitle * My Con- 
fessions/ into which he pours an intimate part 
of his life under a thin disguise of fiction, a 
book invariably exciting a unique kind of in- 
terest in the reader be he conscious or not of 
the presence of this autobiographical element. 
Fielding's ' Amelia,' Thackeray's * Penden- 
nis/ Dickens's ' David Copperfield,' Charlotte 



PT" 



?■?' 



THE MILL ON THE FLOSS. 



173 



Bronte's * Villette/ are cases in point. * The 
Mill on the Floss' is a work of similar nature. 
Maggie Tulliver is George Eliot herself, but 
only one side, one portion, one phase of George 
Eliot's many-sided, vastly complex nature. 
It is George Eliot's inner life in childhood 
* and youth as it appeared to her own con- 
sciousness. We recognize in it her mental 
acuteness, her clinging affectionateness, her 
ambition, her outlook beyond the present, 
her religious and' moral preoccupations ; even 
her genius is not so much omitted as left in 
an undeveloped, rudimentary state. While her 
make-believe stories, her thirst for knowledge, 
her spiritual wrestlings, and the passionate 
response of her soul to high thinking, noble 
music, and the beautiful in all its forms, show 
that the making of genius was there in germ. 
Much in the same manner Goethe was fond 
of partitioning his nature, and of giving only 
the weaker side to his fictitious representa- 
tives. Conscious in himself of fluctuations of 
purpose which he only got the better of by 
his indomitable will, he usually endowed these 
characters with his more impulsive, pliant self, 
as manifested in Werther, in Tasso, in Edward 
of the * Elective Affinities.* In this sense also 
Maggie Tulliver resembles George Eliot. She 
is her potential self, such as she might have 



174 GEORGE ELIOT. 

been had there not been counterbalancing 
tendencies of unusual force, sufficient to hold 
in check all erratic impulses contrary to the 
main direction of her life. 

While tempted to dwell largely on Maggie 
TuUiver, the central figure of ' The Mill on 
the Floss,' it would be very unfair to slur over 
the other admirably drawn characters of this 
novel. • Her brother Tom, already repeatedly 
alluded to, is in every sense the counterpart 
of " Sister Maggie." Hard and narrow-minded 
he was from a boy, "particularly clear and 
positive on one point, namely, that he would 
punish everybody who deserved it : why, he 
wouldn't have minded being punished him- 
self, if he deserved it ; but, then, he never did 
deserve it." This strikes the key-note of a 
character whose stern inflexibility, combined 
with much practical insight and dogged per- 
sistence of effort, is at the same time dignified 
by a high, if somewhat narrow, sense of family 
honor. Conventional respectability, in fact, is 
Tom Tulliver's religion. He is not in any 
sense bad, or mean, or sordid ; he is only so 
circumscribed in his perceptive faculties, that 
he has no standard by which to measure 
thoughts or feelings that transcend his own 
very limited conception of life. 

Both by his good and his bad qualities, by 



THE MILL ON THE FLOSS. 175 

his excellencies and his negations, Tom Tul- 
liver proves himself what he is — a genuine 
sprig of the Dodson family, a chip of the old 
block ! And the Dodson sisters are, in their 
way, among the most amazingly living por- 
traitures that George Eliot ever achieved. 
Realism in art can go no further in this di- 
rection. These women, if present in the flesh, 
would not be so distinctively vivid as when 
beheld through the transfixing medium of 
George Eliot's genius. For here we have the 
personages, with all their quaintnesses, their 
eccentricities, their odd, old-fashioned twists 
and ways — only observed by fragments in 
actual life — successfully brought to a focus 
for the delight and amusement of genera- 
tions of readers. There is nothing grotesque, 
nothing exaggerated, in these humorous fig^ 
ures. The comic effect is not produced, as 
is often the case with the inventions of Dick- 
ens, by some set peculiarity of manner or 
trick of speech, more in the spirit of cari- 
cature. On the contrary, it is by a strict 
adherence to the just mean of nature, by a 
conscientious care not to overstep her proba- 
bilities, that we owe these matchless types of 
English provincial life. And the genuine 
humor of these types verges on the pathetic, 
in that the infinitely little of their lives is' so 



176 GEORGE ELIOT, 

magnified by them out of all proportion to its 
real importance. Mrs. Glegg, with her dicta- 
torial ways, her small economies, her anxiety 
to make a handsome figure in her will, and 
her invariable reference to what was ''the 
way in our family," as a criterion of right 
behavior on all occasions: Mrs. Pullet, the 
wife of the well-to-do yeoman-farmer, bent on 
proving her gentility and wealth by the deli- 
cacy of her health, and the quantity of doctor^s 
stufiE she can afford to imbibe : Mrs. Tulliver, 
the good, muddle-headed woman, whose hus- 
band ''picked her from her sisters o* purpose, 
'cause she was a bit weak, like," and for whom 
the climax of misery in bankruptcy is the loss 
of her china and table4inen : these, as well as 
the hen-pecked Mr. Glegg, and the old-maidish 
Mr. Pullet, are worthy pendants to Mrs. Poyser 
and Dolly Winthrop. 

Whether too great a predominance may 
not be given to the narrow, trivial views of 
these people, with their prosaic respectability, 
is a nice question, which one is inclined to an- 
swer' in the negative on reading such a conju- 
gal scene as that between Mr. and Mrs. Glegg, 
after the latter's quarrel with Mr. Tulliver : 

" It was a hard case that a vigorous mood 
for quarrelling, so highly capable of using any 
opportunity, should not meet with a single 



r 



THE MILL ON THE FLOSS. 177 

remark from Mr. Glegg on which to exer- 
cise itself. But by-and-by it appeared that 
his silence would aaswer the purpose, for he 
heard himself apostrophized at last in that 
tone peculiar to the wife ot one's bosom. 

" * Well, Mr. Glegg ! it's a poor return I- 
get for making you the wife I've made you all 
these years. If this is the way I'm to be 
treated, I'd better ha' known it before my 
poor father died, and then when I'd wanted 
a home, I should ha' gone elsewhere — as the 
choice was offered me.' 

."Mr. Glegg paused from his porridge and 
looked up, not with any new amazement, but 
simply with that quiet, habitual wonder with 
which we regard constant mysteries. 

" * Why, Mrs. G., what have I done now?' 
1 " * Done now, Mr. Glegg .? done now ? . . , 
I'm sorry for you/ 

" Not seeing his way to any pertinent an- 
swer, Mr. Glegg reverted to his porridge. 

"'There's husbands in the world,' continued 
Mrs. Glegg, after a pause, ' as 'ud have known 
how to do something different to siding with 
everybody else against their own wives. Per- 
haps I'm wrong, and you can teach me better. 
But I've allays heard as it's the husband's 
place to stand by the wife, instead of rejoicing 

and triumphing when folks insult her.* 

12 



178 



GEORGE ELIOT. 



" * Now what call have you to say that ? * 
said Mr. Glegg rather warmly, for, though a 
kind man, he was not as meek as Moses. 
' When did I rejoice or triumph over you ? ' 

" ' There's ways o' doing things worse than 
speaking out plain^ Mr." Glegg. I'd sooner 
you'd tell me to my face as you make light of 
me, than try to make as everybody's in the 
right but me, and come to your breakfast in 
the morning, as I've hardly slept an hour this 
night, and sulk at me as if I was the dirt un- 
der your feet.' 

" ' Sulk at you } * said Mr. Glegg, in a tone 
of angry facetiousness. ' You're like a tipsy 
man as thinks everybody's had too much but 
himself.' 

" * Don't lower yourself with using coarse 
language to me, Mr. Glegg! It makes you 
look very small, though you can't see your- 
self,' said Mrs. Glegg, in a tone of energetic 
compassion. ' A man in your place should' 
set an example, and talk more sensible.' " 

After a good deal of sparring in the same 
tone, Mr. Glegg at last bursts forth : " * Did 
ever anybody hear the like i* this parish } A 
woman with everything provided for her, and 
allowed to keep her own money the same as 
if it was settled on her, and with a gig' new 
stuffed and lined at no end o' expense, and 



THE MILL ON THE FLOSS. 



179 



provided for when I die beyond anything she 
could expect ... to go on i* this way, biting 
and snapping like a mad dog! It's beyond 
everything, as God Almighty should ha' made 
women so! (These last words were uttered 
in a tone of sorrowful agitation. Mr. Glegg 
pushed his tea from him, and tapped the table 
with both his hands.) 

•* * Well, Mr. Glegg ! if those are your feel- 
ings, it*s best they should be known,' said Mrs. 
Glegg, taking off her napkin, and folding it 
in an excited manner. * But if you talk o' my 
being provided for beyond what I could expect, 
I beg leave to tell you as Td a right to expect 
a many things as I don't find. And as to my 
being like a mad dog, it's well if you're not 
cried shame on by the country for your treat- 
ment of me, for it's what I can't bear, and I 
won't bear.' . . . 

" Here Mrs. Glegg's voice intimated that 
she was going to cry, and, breaking o£E from 
speech, she rang the bell violently. 

" * Sally,* she said, rising from her chair, 
and speaking in rather a choked voice, ' light 
a fire up-stairs, and put the blinds down. 
Mr. Glegg, you'll please order what you like 
for dinner. I shall have gruel J " 

Equally well drawn in their way, though 
belonging to a different class of character, are 



l8o GEORGE ELIOT. 

Maggie's cousin, the lovely, gentle, and re- 
fined Lucy; Philip Wakem, whose physical 
malformation is compensated by exceptional 
culture and nobility of nature ; Mr. Tulliver, 
the headstrong, violent, but withal generous, 
father of Maggie, and his sister Mrs. Moss, 
whose motherliness and carelessness of ap- 
pearances form a striking foil to the Dodson 
sisters. Indeed, ' The Mill on the Floss ' is 
so rich in minor characters that it is impossi- 
ble to do more than mention such capital 
sketches as that of Bob Jakin and his dog 
Mumps, or of Luke, the head miller, who 
has no opinion of reading, considering that 
"There's fools enoo — an* rogues enoo — wi- 
out lookin' i' books for 'em.*' 

The distinguishing feature of this novel, 
however, lies not so much in its wealth of 
portraiture or freshness of humor as in a cer- 
tain passionate glow of youth, which emanates 
from the heroine, and seems to warm the story 
through and through. For passion, pathos, 
and poetic beauty of description, ' The Mill on 
the Floss ' is certainly unique among George 
Eliot's works. 



CHAPTER X. 



SILAS MARKER. 



'The Mill on the Floss/ which appeared 
in 1 860, fully established George Eliot's 
popularity with the public. In the same year 
she published anonymously, in Blackwood' s 
Magazine, a short story called^ * The Lifted 
Veil/ This tale is curious as differing con- 
siderably from her general style, having a 
certain mystical turn, which perhaps recom- 
mended it more especially to the admiration 
of Bulwer Lytton ; but, indeed, it attracted 
general attention. In the meanwhile the re- 
lations between author and publisher became 
more and more friendly ; the latter's critical 
acumen and sound judgment being highly 
esteemed by George Eliot. " He judged well 
of writing," she remarked, " because he had 
learned to judge well of men and things, not 
merely through quickness of observation and 
insight, but with the illumination pf a heart 
in the right place." / 
This was the most productive period of 



1 82 GEORGE ELIOT. 

George Eliot's life. In three successive years 
she published 'Adam Bede/ 'The Mill on 
the Floss/ and ' Silas Marner/ 'the last story 
appearing in 1861. When the amount of 
thought, observation^ and wisdom concen- 
trated in these novels is taken into 'consider- 
ation, it must be admitted that her mental 
energy was truly astonishing. But it was 
the accumulated experience of her whole past, 
the first abundant math borne by the spring- 
tide of life which was garnered up in these 
three remarkable works. Afterwards, when 
she came to write her next book, ' Romola,' 
she turned to entirely fresh fields of inspira- 
tion ; indeed, already at this date her mind 
was occupied with the idea of an Italian 
novel of the time of Savonarola. 

In the meanwhile she produced her most 
finished work. She wrote ' Silas Marner, the 
Weaver of Raveloe.' I call 'Silas Marner' 
her most finished work, not only because of 
the symmetry with which each part is ad- 
justed in relation to the whole, nor because 
of the absence of those partly satirical, partly 
moral reflections with which George Eliot 
usually accompanies the action of her stories, 
but chiefly on account of the simple pathos 
of the central motive into which all the differ- 
ent incidents and characters naturally con- 



■^* "^- "^ * - '^'* " -.■•■^. 






SILAS MARNER. 183 

verge. How homely are the elements from 
which this work of art is constructed, andi 
how matchless the result ! 

Nothing but the story of a humble weaver 
belonging to a small dissenting community 
which assembled in Lantern Yard, some- 
where in the back streets of a manufacturing 
town; of a faithless love and a false friend, 
and the loss of trust in all things human or 
divine. Nothing but the story of a lone, 
bewildered man, shut out from his kind, con- 
centrating every balked passion into one — 
tha all-engrossing passion for gold. And 
then the sudden disappearance of the hoard 
from its accustomed hiding-place, and in its 
stead the startling apparition of a golden- 
haired little child, found one snowy winter's 
night sleeping on the floor in front of the 
glimmering hearth. And the gradual re- 
awakening of love in the heart of the soli- 
tary man, a love " drawing his hope and joy 
continiirally onward beyond the money," and 
once more bringing him into sympathetic re- 
lations with his fellow-men. 

"In old days," says the story, "there were 
angels who came and took men by the hand 
and led them away from the city of destruc- 
tion. We see no white-winged angels now. 
But yet men are led away from threatening 



1 84 GEORGE ELIOT. 

destruction ; a hand is put into theirs, which 
leads them forth gently towards a calm and 
bright land, so that they look no more back- 
ward, and the hand may be a little child's." 

Curiously enough, I came quite recently 
upon a story which in its leading features 
very closely resembles this tale of the * Weaver 
of Raveloe/ It is called * Jermola the Potter,' 
and is considered the masterpiece of J. I. 
Kraszewski, the Polish novelist, author of at 
least one hundred and fifty works in different 
branches of literature. * Jermola,' the most 
popular of them all, has been translated into 
French, Dutch, and German. It gives an 
extraordinarily vivid picture of peasant life-^ 
in a remote Polish village, and not only of 
peasant life, but of the manners and habits^ 
of the landed proprietor, the Jew, the arti- 
san, and the yeoman, in a community whose 
modes of life have undergone but little modi- 
fication since the Middle Ages. These pic- 
tures, though not elaborated with anything" 
like the minute care of George Eliot's de- 
scriptions of English country life, yet from 
their extreme simplicity produce a most pow^^ 
erful impression on the reader. 

The story, in brief, is that of Jermola, the- 
body servant of a Polish nobleman in Vol- 
hynia, whom he has served with rare devotion 



I . 



SILAS MARNER, 185 

during the greater part of his life. Left 
almost a beggar at his master's death, with- 
out a single human tie, all he can get for 
years of faithful service is a tumble-down, 
forsaken old inn, where he manages to keep 
body and soul together in a dismantled room 
that but partly shelters him from the inclem- 
ency of the weather. Hopeless, aimless, love- 
less, he grows old before his time, and the 
passing of the days affects him hardly more 
than it does a stone. But one evening, as he 
is sitting in front of a scanty fire repeating 
the Lord's Prayer, the cry as of a little child 
startles him from his devotion. Going to 
look what can be the meaning of such un- 
usual sounds, he soon discovers an infant in 
linen swaddling-clothes wailing under an old 
oak tree. He takes the foundling home, and 
from that moment a new life enters the old 
man's breast. He is rejuvenated by twenty 
years. He is kept in a constant flutter of 
hope, fear, and activity. A kind-hearted 
woman, called the Kozaczicha, tenders him 
her services, but he is so jealous of any one 
but himself doing aught for the child, that he 
checks her advances, and by hook or by crook 
obtains a goat from an extortionate Jew, by 
the help of which he rears the boy satisfac- 
torily. Then, wishing to make a livelihood 



l86 GEORGE EUOT. 

for the child's sake, he inclines at first to the 
craft of the weaver, but finally turns potter 
in his old age. Love sharpening his wits, he 
plies quite a thriving trade in time, and the 
beautiful boy brings him into more friendly 
relations with his neighbors. But one day, 
when Radionek, who has learned Jermola's 
trade, is about twelve years old, the real 
parents appear and claim him as their own. 
They had never dared to acknowledge their 
marriage till the father, who had threatened 
to disinherit his son in such an event, had de- 
parted this life. Now, having nothing more 
to fear, N they want to have their child 1>ack, 
and to bring him up as befits their station in 
life. Jermola suffers a deadly anguish at this 
separation ; the boy, too, is in despair, for he 
clings fondly to the old man who has reared 
him with more than a father's love. But the 
parents insisting on their legal rights,, Radi- 
onek is at last carried off to their house in 
town, to be turned into a gentleman, bein^ 
only grudgingly allowed to see Jermola from 
time to time. The boy pines, however, for 
the dear familiar presence of his foster-father, 
and' the free outdoor life, and at last, after 
some years of misery, he appears one day 
suddenly in Jermola* s hut, who has given up 
his pottery in order to be secretly near the 



sr 



SILAS MARNER, 187 

child he is afraid to go and see. The piteous 
entreaties of Radionek, and the sight of his 
now sickly countenance, induce the old man 
to flee into the pathless forests, where the two 
may escape unseen, and reach some distant 
part of the country to take up their old pleas- 
ant life once more. But the hardships and 
fatigues of the journey are too much for the 
boy's enfeebled health, and just as they come 
within sight of human dwellings, he is seized 
with a fever which cuts his young life short, 
leaving Jermola nearly crazy with anguish. 
Long afterwards a little decrepit old man 
was to be seen by churchgoers sitting near a 
grave, whom the children mocked by calling 
the " bony little man," because he seemed to 
consist of nothing but bones. 

Such is the bare outline of a story whose 
main idea, that of the redemption of a human 
soul from cold, petrifying isolation, by means 
of a little child, is unquestionably the same as 
in * Silas Marner.' Other incidents, such as 
that of the peasant woman who initiates Jer- 
mola into the mysteries of baby management, 
and the disclosure of the real parents after a 
lapse of years, wanting to have their child 
back, suggest parallel passages in the English 
book. But coincidences of this kind are, 
after all, natural enough, considering that the 



1 88 GEORGE ELIOT. 

circle of human feeling and action is limited, 
and that in all ages and countries like condi- 
tions must give rise to much the same se- 
quence of events. It is therefore most likely 
that George Eliot never saw, and possibly 
never even heard of, ' Jermola the Potter.' 

The monotonous tone in the narrative of 
this Polish novel is in strong contrast, it may 
be observed, to George EHot's vivid and 
varied treatment of her subject. This mo- 
notony, however, suits the local coloring of 
'Jermola,' by suggesting the idea of the 
league-long expanse of ancient forests whose 
sombre solitudes encompass with a myste- 
rious awe the little temporary dwelHngs of 
men. But if the foreign story surpasses 
' Silas Marner ' in tragic pathos, the latter 
far excels it in the masterly handling of char- 
acter and dialogue, in the underlying breadth 
of thought, and, above all, in the precious salt 
of its humor. 

Indeed, for humor, for sheer force, for in- 
tense realism, George Eliot, in the immortal 
scene at the " Rainbow," may be said to rival 
Shakespeare. Her farriers, her butchers, her 
wheelwrights, her tailors, have the same 
startling vitality, the same unmistakable ac- 
cents of nature, the same distinctive yet un- 
forced individuality, free from either exaggera- 



p^ 



SILAS MARNER, 



J 89 



tion or caricature. How delicious is the de- 
scription of the party assembled in the kitchen 
of that inn, whose landlord — a strong advo- 
cate for compromising whatever differences 
of opinion may arise between his customers, 
as beings "all alike in need of* liquor" — 
clinches all arguments by his favorite phrase 
— " You're both right and you're both 
wrong, as I say." How admirably comic are 
these villagers, invariably beginning their 
nightly sittings by a solemn silence, in which 
one and all puff away at their pipes, staring 
at the fire " as if a bet were depending on 
the first man who winked." And when they 
begin at last, how rich is the flavor of that 
talk, given with an unerring precision that 
forthwith makes one acquainted with the 
crass ignorance and shrewdness, the mother- 
wit and superstition, so oddly jumbled to- 
gether in the villager's mind. What sublime 
absence of all knowledge of his native land is 
shown by the veteran parish clerk, Mr. Macey, 
in speaking of a person from another coujity 
which apparently could not be so very differ- 
ent " from this country, for he brought a fine 
breed o' sheep with him, so there must be 
pastures there, and everything reasonable." 
Yet the same man can put down youthful 
presumption pretty sharply, as when he re- 




IQO 



GEORGE ELIOT. 



marks : " There's allays two 'pinions ; there's 
the 'pinion a man has o' himsen, and there's 
the 'pinion other folks have on him. There'd 
be two 'pinions about a cracked bell, if the 
bell could hear itself." 

Dolly Winthrop, the wife of the jolly wheel- 
wright who makes one of the company at the 
" Rainbow," is no less admirable. She is not 
cut after any particular pattern or type of hu- 
man nature, but has a distinctive individuality, 
and is full of a freshness and unexpectedness 
which sets foregone conclusions at defiance. 
A notable woman, with a boundless appetite 
for work, so that, rising at half-past four, she 
has "a bit o* time to spare most days, for 
when one gets up betimes i' the morning the 
clock seems to stan' still tow'rt ten, afore it's \ 
time to go about the victual." Yet with all 
this energy she is not shrewish, but a calm, 
grave woman, in much request in sick-rooms 
or wherever there is trouble. She is good- 
looking, too, and of a comfortable temper, be- 
ing patiently tolerant of her husband's jokes, 
" considering that ' men would be so,' and 
viewing the stronger sex * in the light of ani- 
mals whom it pleased Heaven to make trou- 
blesome like bulls or turkey-cocks.' " 
. Her vague idea, shared indeed by Silas, 
that he has quite another faith from herself, 



r- 



SILAS MARNER, 



191 . 



as coming from another part of the country, 
gives a vivid idea of remote rural life, as well 
as her own dim, semi-pagan but^^horoughly 
reverential religious feelings, prompting her 
always^o speak of the Divinity in the plural, 
as when she says to Marner : " IVe looked 
for help in the right quarter, and give myself 
up to Them as we must all give ourselves up 
to at the last ; and if we*n done our part, it 
isn't to be believed as Them as are above us 
'uU be worse nor we are, and come short o' 
Theirn." ^ 

The humor shown Jn these scenes and 
characters, or, more properly speaking, George 
Eliot's humor in general, belongs to the high- 
est order, the same as Shakespeare's. It is 
based on the essential elements of human 
nature itself, on the pathetic incongruities of 
which that " quintessence of dust," man, is- 
made up, instead of finding the comic in the 
purely accidental or external circumstances of 
life, as is the case with such humorists as 
Rabelais and Dickens. These latter might 
find a good subject for their comic vein in 
seeing the Venus of Milo's broken nose, which 
a mischievous urchin had again stuck on the 
wrong side upwards — a sight to send the. 
ordinary spectator into fits of laughter. Bujt 
the genuine humorist sees something in that 



192 



GEORGE ELIOT. 



feature itself, as nature shaped it, to excite his 
facetiousness. In *A Minor Prophet' some 
lines occur in which a somewhat similar view 
of the genuine source of humor is pithily 
put: 

" My yearnings fail 
To reach that high apocalyptic mount 
"Which shows in bird's-eye view a perfect world. 
Or enter warmly into other joys 
Than those of faulty, struggling human kind. 
That strain upon my soul's too feeble wing 
Ends in ignoble floundering : I fall 
Into short-sighted pity for the men 
Who, living in those perfect future times. 
Will not know half the dear imperfect things 
That move my smiles and tears — will never know 
The fine old incongruities that raise 
My friendly laugh; the innocent conceits 
That like a needless eyeglass or black patch 
Give those who wear them harmless happiness ; 
The twists and cracks in our poor earthenware, 
That touch me to more conscious fellowship 
(I am not myself the finest Parian) 
With my coevals." 

Again, in her essay on * Heinrich Heine,' 
George Eliot thus defines the difference be- 
tween humor and wit : " Humor is of earlier 
growth than wit, and it is in accordance with 
this earlier growth that it has more affinity 
with the poetic tendencies, while wit is more 
nearly allied to the ratiocinative intellect. 
Humor draws its materials from situations 
and characteristics ; wit seizes on unexpected 



-ifsi ■■ _ . 






SILAS MARNER. 193 

and complex relations. ... It is only the in- 
genuity, condensation, and instantaneousness 
which lift some witticisms from reasoning into 
wit ; they are reasoning raised to its highest 
power. On the other hand, humor, in its 
higher forms and in proportion as it asso- 
ciates itself with the sympathetic emotions, 
continually passes into poetry : nearly all 
great modern humorists may be called prose 
poets." 

The quality which distinguishes George 
Eliot's humor may be said to characterize 
her treatment of human nature generally. In 
her delineations of life she carefully eschews 
the anomalous or exceptional, pointing out re- 
peatedly that she would not, if she could, be 
the writer, however brilliant, who dwells by 
preference on the -moral or intellectual attri- 
butes which mark off his hero from the crowd 
instead of on those which he has in common 
with average humanity. Nowhere perhaps in 
her works do we find this tendency so strik- 
ingly illustrated as in the one now under con- 
sideration ; for here we have the study of a 
human being who, by stress of circumstances, 
develops into a most abnormal specimen of 
mankind, yet who is brought back to normal 
conditions and to wholesome relations with 
his fellow-men by such a natural process as 

»3 



194 GEORGE ELIOT. 

the re-awakening of benumbed sympathies 
through his love for the little foundling child. 
The scene where he finds that child has only- 
been touched on in a passing allusion, yet 
there is no more powerfully drawn situation in 
any of her novels than that where Silas, with 
the child in his arms, goes out into the dark 
night, and, guided by the little footprints in 
the virgin snow, discovers the dead mother, 
Godfrey Cass's opium-eating wife, lying with 
"her head sunk low in the furze and half 
covered with the shaken snow." There is a 
picture of this subject by the young and sin- 
gularly gifted artist, the late Oliver Madox 
Brown, more generally known as a novelist, 
which is one • of the few pictorial inter- 
pretations that seem to completely project 
on the canvas a visible embodiment of the 
spirit of the original. The pale, emaciated 
weaver, staring with big, short-sighted eyes 
at the body of the unconscious young woman 
stretched on the ground, clutching the lusty, 
struggling child with one arm, while with the 
other he holds a lantern which throws a feeble 
gleam on the snow — is realized with excep- 
tional intensity. 

The exquisite picture of Eppie's chil(^ood, 
the dance she leads her soft-hearted foster- 
father, are things to read, not to describe. 




SILAS MARNER, 195 

unless one could quote whole pages of this 
delightful idyl, which for gracious charm and 
limpid purity of description recalls those pearls 
among prose-poems, George Sand's ' Francois 
le Champi ' and ' La Mare au Diable/ 



CHAPTER XL 



ROMOLA. 



* RoMOLA ' marks a new departure in George 
Eliot's literary career. From the present she 
turned to the past, from the native to the for- 
jeign, from the domestic to the historical. Yet 
in thus shifting her subject-matter, she did 
not alter the strongly pronounced tendencies 
underlying her earlier novels ; there was more 
of spontaneous, humorous description of life 
in the Jatter, whereas in ' Romola * the ethical ( 
teaching which forms so prominent a feature 
of George Eliot's art, though the same in 
essence, was more distinctly wrought out. \ 
Touching on this very point, she observes in 
a letter to an American correspondent : ** It 
is perhaps less irrelevant to say, apropos of a 
distinction you seem to make between my 
earlier and later works, that though I trust 
there is some growth in my appreciation of 
others and in my self-distrust, there has been 
ho change in the point of view from which I 
regard our life since I wrote my first fiction, 



ROM OLA. 197 

the ' Scenes of Clerical Life/ Any apparent 
change of spirit must be due to something 
of which I am unconscious. The principles 
which are at the root of my effort to paint 
Dinah Morris are equally at the root of my 
effort to paint Mordecai." 

The first section of ' Romola * appeared in 
the Corftkill Magazine ior the summer of 1862, 
and, running its course in that popular period- 
ical, was finished in the summer of the follow- 
ing year. Mr. Lewes, in a letter writen from 
16 Blandford Square, July 5, 1862, to some 
old friends of George Eliot, makes the follow- 
ing remarks in reference to this new form of 
publication: "My main object in persuading 
her to consent to serial, publication was not 
the unheard-of magnificence of the offer, but 
the advantage to such a work of being read 
slowly and deliberately, instead of being gal- 
loped through in three volumes. I think it 
quite unique, and so will the public when it 
gets over the first feeling of surprise and dis- 
appointment at the book not being English,, 
and like its predecessor." And some time 
afterwards he wrote to the same friends: 
" Marian lives entirely in the fifteenth cen- 
tury,- and is much cheered every now and then 
by hearing indirectly how her book is appre- 
ciated by the higher class of minds, and some 



ig8 GEORGE EUOT. 

of the highest ; though it is not, and cannot 
be popular. In Florence we hear they are 
wild with delight and surprise at such a work 
being executed by a foreigner ; as if an Ital- 
ian had ever done anything of the kind ! " 

Before writing ' Romola * George Eliot had 
spent six weeks in Florence in order to famil- 
iarize herself with the manners and conver- 
sation of its inhabitants, and yet she hardly 
caught the trick of Italian speech, and for 
some time afterwards she hung back from 
beginning her story, as her characters not 
only refused to speak Italian to her, but would 
not speak at all, as we can well imagine Mrs. 
Poyser, Bartle Massey, and Maggie to have 
done. These recalcitrant spirits were at last 
brought to order, and she succeeded so well, 
especially in her delineation of the lower 
classes, that they have been recognized by 
Italians as true to the life. 

It should, however, be mentioned that the 
greatest modern Italian, Giuseppe Mazzini, 
found fault with the handling, and, indeed, 
with the introduction into this novel of the 
great figure of Savonarola. He considered 
that it compared unfavorably with 'Adam 
Bede,' a novel he genuinely admired, all but 
the marriage of Adam with Dinah Morris, 
which, he said, shocked his feelings, not 



«r 



X 



ROM OLA. 



199 



having any conception that the taste of the 
novel-reading public demands a happy ending 
whatever may have been the previous course 
of the three volumes. Another illustrious 
man, D. G. Rossetti, whose judgment on such 
a subject carries peculiar weight, considered 
George Eliot to have been much less success- 
ful in ' Romola * than in her novels of English 
country l^fe. He did not think that the tone 
and color of Italian life in the fifteenth century 
were caught with that intuitive perception of a 
bygone age characteristic of a Walter Scott or 
a Meinhold. The Florentine contemporaries 
of " Fra Girolamo " seemed to him Nineteenth 
Century men and women dressed up in the 
costume of the Fifteenth. The book, to use 
his expression, was not " native." 

It is a majestic book, however : the most 
grandly planned of George Eliot's novels. It 
has a certain architectural dignity of structure, 
quite in keeping with its Italian nationality, a 
quality, by the way, entirely absent from the 
three later novels. The impressive historical 
background is not unlike one of Mr. Irving's 
magnificently wrought Italian stage-effects, 
rich in movement and color, yet helping to 
throw the chief figures into greater relief. The 
erudition shown in this work ; the vast yet mi- 
nute acquaintance with the habits of thought, 



200 GEORGE ELIOT. 

the manners, the very talk of the Florentines 
of that day are truly surprising ; but perhaps 
the very fact of that erudition being so per- 
ceptible shows that the material has not been 
absolutely vitalized. The amount of labor 
George Eliot expended on ' Romola ' was so 
great, that it was the book which, she re- 
marked to a friend, "she began a young 
woman and ended an old one." The deep 
impression her works had made upon the 
public mind heightened her natural conscien- 
tiousness, and her gratitude for the confidence 
with which each fresh contribution from her 
pen was received, increased her anxiety to 
wield her influence for the highest ends. 

But her gratitude to the public by no means 
extended to the critics. She recoiled from 
them with the instinctive shrinking of the 
sensitive plant. These interpreters between 
author and public were in her eyes a most 
superfluous modern institution : though . at 
one time she herself had not scorned to sit 
in the critic's ^at. It is well-known that 
G. H. Lewes acted as a kind of moral screen 
protecting her from every gust or breath of 
criticism that was not entirely genial. One 
lady, after reading ' The Mill on the Floss,* 
had written off in the heat of the moment, 
and, with the freedom of old friendship, while 



ROM OLA, 201 

expressing the warmest admiration for the 
beauty of the first two volumes, she had ven- 
tured to find fault with part of the third. 
This letter was returned by Lewes, who 
begged her at the same time never to write 
again in this strain to George Eliot, to whom 
he had not ventured to show it for fear it 
should too painfully affect her. In a letter to 
the American lady already mentioned, George 
Eliot, after referring to this habit of Mr. 
Lewes, says : " In this way I get confirmed 
in my impression that the criticism of any 
new writing is shifting and untrustworthy. 
I hardly think that any critic can have so 
keen a sense of the shortcomings in my 
works as that I groan under in the course 
of writing them, and I cannot imagine any 
edification coming to an author from a sort of 
reviewing which consists in attributing to him 
or her unexpressed opinions, and in imagining 
circumstances which may be alleged as petty 
private- motives for the treatment of subjects 
which ought to be of general human interest. 
. . . I have been led into this rather super- 
fluous sort of remark by the mention of a rule 
which seemed to require explanation." 

And again on another occasion to the same 
effect : " But do not expect criticism from me; 
I hate 'sitting in the seat of judgment,' and I 



202 GEORGE ELIOT, 

would rather impress the public generally with 
the sense that they may get the best result 
from a book without necessarily forming an 
'opinion' about it, than I would rush into 
stating opinions of my own. The floods of 
nonsense printed in the form of critical opin- 
ions seem to me a chief curse of our times — 

. a chief obstacle to true culture." 

In spite of these severe strictures on the 
critics and their opinions, an " opinion " must 
now be g^ven about 'Romola.' This novel 
may really be judged from two entirely dif- 
ferent points of view, possibly from others 
besides, but, as it appears to me, from two. 

/One may consider it as an historical work, 
with its moving pageants, its civic broils, its 
church festivals, its religious revival, its fickle 
populace, now siding with the Pope, and now 
with the would-be reformer of the Papacy. 

( Or again one may regard the conjugal rela- 
tions between Romola and Tito, the slow 
spiritual growth of the one, and the swifter 
moral disintegration of the other, as one 
of the subtlest studies in psychology in lit- 
erature. 

To turn to the scenic details which form 
a considerable element of this historical pic- 
ture, I have already hinted that they are not 
without a taint of cumbrousness and pedan- 



ROMOLA. 203 

try. . The author seems to move somewhat 
heavily under her weight of learning, and we 
miss that splendid natural swiftness and ease 
of movement which Shakespeare, Goethe, and 
Hugo know how to impart to their crowds 
and spectacular effects. If, instead of the 
people, one examines the man who dominated 
the people, the large, massive, imposing figure 
of Savonarola, one must admit that the char- 
acter is very powerfully and faithfully executed 
but not produced at one throw. He does not 
take the imagination by storm as he would 
have done had Carlyle been at his fashioning. 
With an epithet or two, with a sharp, incisive 
phrase, the latter would have conjured the 
great Dominican from his grave, and we 
should have seen him, or believed at least 
that we saw him, as he was in the flesh when 
his impassioned voice resounded through the 
Duomo, swaying the hearts of the Florentine 
people with the force of a great conviction. 
That he stands out thus tangibly in ' Romola* 
it would be futile to assert : nevertheless, he 
is a noble, powerful study, although one has 
laboriously to gather into one's mind the 
somewhat mechanical descriptions which help 
to portray his individuality. The idea under- 
lying the working out of this grand character 
is the same which Goethe had once proposed 



204 



GEORGE EUOT. 



to himself in his projected, but unfortunately 
never executed, drama of ' Mahomet' It is 
that of a man of moral genius, who, in soli- 
tude and obscurity, has conceived some n^w, 
profounder aspect of religious truth, and who, 
stirred by a sublime devotion, now goes forth 
among men to bless and regenerate them by 
teaching them this higher life But in his 
contact with the multitude, in his efforts at 
influencing it, the prophet or preacher is in 
his turn influenced. If he fails to move by 
the loftiest means, he will gradually resort to 
the lower in order to effect his purpose. The 
purity of his spirit is tarnished, ambition has 
crept in where hdUness reigned, and his per- 
fect rectitude of purpose will be sacrificed so 
that he may but rule. 

Such are the opposing tendencies co-exist- 
ing in Savonarola's mixed but lofty nature. 
For " that dissidence between inward reality 
and outward seeming was not the Christian 
simplicity after which he had striven through 
years of his youth and prime, and which he 
had preached as a chief fruit of the Divine 
Iffe. In the heat and stress of the day, with 
cheeks burning, with shouts ringing in the 
ears, who is so blest as to remember the yearn- 
ings he had in the cool' and silent morning, 
and know that he has not belied them.^" 



ROM OLA. 205 

And again : " It was the habit of Savonarola's 
mind' to conceive great things, and to feel 
that he was the man to do them. Iniquity 
should be brought low ; the cause of justice, 
purity, and love should triumph, and it should 
triumph by his voice, by his work, by his 
blood. In moments of ecstatic contempla- 
tion, doubtless, the sense of self melted in the 
sense of the Unspeakable, and in that part of 
his experience lay the elements of genuine 
self-abasement ; but in the presence of his 
fellow-men for whom he was to act, pre- 
eminence seemed a necessary condition of 
life." But, as George Eliot says, " Power rose 
against him, not because of his sins, but be- 
cause of his greatness ; not because he sought 
to deceive the world, but because he sought 
to make it noble. And through that great- 
ness of his he endured a double agony ; not 
only the reviling, and the torture, and the/ 
death-throe, but the agony of sinking from* 
the vision of glorious achievement into that 
deep shadow where he could only say, ' I 
count as nothing : darkness encompasses me ; 
yet the light I saw was the tnie light.' " 

But after all, in George Eliot's story the 
chief interest attaching to "Fra Girolamo" 
consists in his influence on Romola's spiritual 
growth. This may possibly be a blemish; 



206 GEORGE EUOT, 

yet in most novels the fictitious characters 
eclipse the historical ones. The effect pro-^ 
duced by the high-souled Romola is not unlike] 
that of an antique statue, at once splendidH 
beautiful and imposingly cold. By the side 
of Tito she reminds one of the pure white- 
ness of marble sculpture as contrasted with 
the rich glowing sensuousness of a Venetian 
picture. 

It is difficult to analyze why the proud, 
loving, single-hearted Romola, who has some- 
thing of the fierceness and impetuosity of 
the old "Bardo blood" in her, should leave 
this impression of coldness; for in spite of 
her acts of magnanimity and self-devotion, 
such, curiously enough, is the case. Perhaps 
in this instance George Eliot modelled the 
character too much according to a philosoph- 
ical conception instead of projecting it, com- 
plete in its incompleteness, as it might have 
come from the hand of Nature. Another 
objection sometimes brought forward, of 
Romola having but little resemblance to an 
Italian woman of the fifteenth century, seems 
to me less relevant. The lofty dignity, the 
pride, the intense adhesion to family tradi- 
tions, were, on the contrary, very marked 
attributes of a high national type during the 
period of Italian supremacy. In fact, the 



ROM OLA, 



207 



character is not without hints and sugges- 
tions of such a woman as Vittoria Colonna, 
while its didactic tendency slightly recalls 
"those awful women of Italy who held pro- 
fessorial chairs, and were great in civil and 
canon law." In one sense Romola is a true 
child of the Renaissance. Brought up by 
her father, the enthusiastic old scholar, in 
pagan ideas, she had remained aloof from 
Roman Catholic beliefs and superstitions, 
and even when transformed by the mighty 
influence of Savonarola into a devoted Pi- 
agnoney her attitude always remains more or 
less that of a Protestant, unwilling to sur- 
render the right of private judgment to the 
Church. 

The clash of character when a woman like 
Romola finds herself chained in a life-long 
bond to such a nature as Tito's — the beau- 
tiful, wily, insinuating Greek — is wrought 
out with wonderful skill and matchless sub- 
tlety of analysis. Indeed Tito is not only 
one of George Eliot's most original creations, 
he is a unique character in fiction. Novel- 
ists, as a rule, only depict the full-blown 
villain or traitor, 'their virtuous and wicked 
people being separated from each other by 
a hard and fast Une much like the goats 
and sheep. They continually treat character 



2o8 GEORGE ELIOT. 

as something permanent and unchangeable, 
whereas to George Eliot it presents itself as 
an organism flexible by nature, subject to 
change under varying conditions, liable on 
the one hand to disease and deterioration, but 
on the other hand no less capable of being 
rehabilitated, refined, or ennobled. This is 
one of the most distinctive notes of George 
Eliot's art, and gives a quickening, fructify- 
ing quality to her moral teaching. But it i§ 
an artistic no less than a moral gain, shar- 
pening the interest felt in the evolution of her 
fictitious personages. For this reason Tito^ 
the creature of circumstances, is perhaps the] 
most striking of all her characters in the eyes) 
of the psychologist. We seem to see the very 
pulse of the human machine laid bare, to see 
the corroding effect of self-indulgence an( 
dread of pain on a nature not intrinsicall; 
wicked, to see at last how, little by littl< 
weakness has led to falsehood, and falsehooc 
to infamy. And yet this creature, who, under 
our eyes, gradually hardens into crime, is one 
so richly dowered with rare gifts of person 
and mind, that in spite of his moral degen-j 
eracy, he fascinates the reader no less than/ 
the men and women supposed to come into! 
actual contact with him. His beauty is de- 
scribed with the same life-like intensity as 



• ROM OLA. 209 

Hetty's: the warm glow of color in his per- 
fectly moulded face, with its dark curls and 
long agate-like eyes; his sunny brightness 
of look, the velvet softness of a manner with 
which he ingratiates himself with young and 
old, and the airy buoyancy of his whole gra- 
cious being, are as vividly portrayed as the 
quick talent to which everything comes natu- 
ral, the abundant good-humor, the acuteness 
of a polished intellect, whose sharp edge will, 
at need, cut relentlessly through every tissue 
of sentiment. 

From Melema's first uneasy debate with 
himself, when, in his splendid, unsoiled youth, 
he enters Florence .a shipwrecked stranger — 
a debate, that is, as to whether he is bound 
to go in search of Baldassare, who has been 
as a father to him — to the moment when bis 
already blunted conscience absolves him from 
such a search, and again, on to that supreme 
crisis when, suddenly face to face with his 
benefactor, he denies him, and so is inevitably 
urged from one act of baseness and cruelty 
to another still blacker^ we have unfolded 
before us, by an unshrinking analyzer of 
human nature, what might not inappropri- 
ately be called "A SouFs Tragedy." The 
wonderful art in the working out of this 
character is shown in the fact that one has 

14 



2IO GEORGE EUOT. 

no positive impression of Tito's innate bad- 
ness, but, on the contrary, feels as if, after his 
first lapses from truth and goodness, there is 
still a possibility of his reforming, if only his 
soft, pleasure-loving nature were not driven/ 
on, almost in spite of himself, by his sbudder-i 
ing dread of shame or suffering in any form/ 
" For," writes George Eliot, " Tito was expe- 
riencing that inexorable law of human souls, 
that we prepare ourselves for sudden deeds 
by the reiterated choice of good or evil which 
gradually determines character." 

The description of the married life of 
Romola and Tito is unsurpassed in George 
Eliot's novels for subtlety and depth of insight : 
notably the young wife's fond striving after 
complete inner harmony, her first, faint, un- 
avowed sense of, something wanting, her in- 
stinctive efforts to keep fast hold of her love 
and trust, and her violent, irrevocable recoil 
on the discovery of Tito's first faithless ac- 
tion. Perhaps there is something cold, almost I 
stern, in Romola's loathing alienation from! 
her husband, and the instantaneous death of\ 
her passionate love. One cannot quite hinder 
the impression that a softer woman might 
have forgiven and won from him a confession 
of his wrong-doing ; a confession which would 
have averted the committal of his worst and 



ROM OLA. 211 

basest deeds. Indeed, it is Tito's awe of his/ 
grand, noble wife, and his dread of her judgJ 
ment, which first of all incite him to pre-( 
varication and lies. 

It is curious to compare George Sand's 
theory of love, in this instance, with George 
Eliot's. In * Leon Leoni,* and in many of 
her novels besides, the Frenchwoman seems 
to imply that for a woman to love once is to 
love always, and that there is nothing so base, 
or mean, or cruel, but she will forgive the 
man on whom she has placed her affections. 
In the story mentioned above she has worked 
out this idea to an extent which, in many 
of its details, is simply revolting. Love is 
there described as a magnetic attraction, un- 
resisted and irresistible, to which the heroine 
absolutely surrenders pride, reason, and con- 
science. Just the opposite kind of love is 
that which we find portrayed in 'Rdmola:' 
it is a love identical with the fullest belief in 
the truth and goodness of the beloved object, 
so that at the first realization of moral^ ob- 
liquity the repulsion created extinguishes that 
love, although there is no outward severance 
of the marriage bond. 

This great novel closes with these signifi- 
cant words, which Romola addresses to Lillo, 
Tito's child, but not her own : 



212 GEORGE ELIOT. 

" And so, my Lillo, if you mean to act nobly, 
and seek to know the best things God has 
put within reach of man, you must learn to 
fix your mind on that end, and not on what 
will happen to you because of it. And re- 
member, if you were to choose something 
lower, and make it the rule of your life to 
seek your own pleasure and escape from what 
is disagreeable, calamity might come just the 
same ; and it would be calamity falling on a 
base mind, which is the one form of sorrow 
that has no balm in it, and that may well make 
a man say, ' It would have been better for me 
if I had never been bom ! ' " 



CHAPTER XII. 

HER POEMS. 

Few are the external events to be now re- 
corded of George Eliot's life. The publi- 
cation of her successive works forms the 
chief landmarks. But the year 1865 is dis- 
tinguished by circumstances of some impor- 
tance. In this year Mr. Lewes, after assisting 
to found the Fortnightly Review y assumed its 
editorship ; and among the contributions to 
the first number of the new Review was a 
short article from the pen of George Eliot on 
Mr. Lecky's important work * The Influence 
of Rationalism.' 

In the course of the same year Mr. and 
Mrsi Lewes moved from 16 Blandford Square 
to the Priory, a commodious house in North 
Bank, St. John's Wood, which has come to 
be intimately associated with the memory of 
George Eliot. Here, in the pleasant dwelling- 
rooms decorated by Owen Jones, might be 
met, at her Sunday afternoon receptions, some 
of the most eminent men in literature, art, 



< 



214 



GEORGE ELIOT. 



and science. For the rest, her life flowed on 
its even tenor, its routine being rigidly regu- 
lated. The morning till lunch time was in- 
variably devoted to writing : in the afternoon 
she either went out for a quiet drive of about 
two hours, or she took a walk with Lewes in 
Regent's Park. There the strange-looking 
couple — she with a certain weird, sibylline 
air, he not unlike some unkempt Polish refu- 
gee of vivacious manners — might be seen, 
swinging their arms, as they hurried along at 
a pace as rapid and eager as their talk. Be- 
sides these walks, George Eliot's chief recrea- 
tion consisted in frequenting concerts and 
picture galleries. To music she was passion- 
ately devoted, hardly ever failing to attend at 
the Saturday afternoon concert^ at St. James's 
Hall, besides frequenting various musical re- 
unions, such as the following extract from one 
of her letters will show : " The other night 
we went to hear the Bach choir — a society of 
ladies and gentlemen got together by Jenny 
Lind, who sings in the middle of them, her 
husband acting as conductor. It is pretty to 
see people who might be nothing but simply 
fashionables taking pains to sing fine music 
in tune and time, with more or less success. 

One of the baritones we know is a G ^ 

who used to be a swell guardsman, and has 



HER POEMS, 



215 



happily taken to good courses while still 
quite young. Another is a handsome young 

G y not of the unsatisfactory Co., but of 

the R G kin. A soprano is Mrs. 

P , wife of the Queen's Secretary, General 

P , the granddaughter of Earl Grey, and 

just like him in the face — and so on. These 
people of * high ' birth are certainly reforming 
themselves a little." 

She likewise never omitted to visit the 
" Exhibition of Old Masters " at Burlington 
House. To most people few things exercise 
so great a strain on their mental and physical 
powers of endurance as the inspection of a 
picture gallery, with its incessant appeal to 
the most concentrated attention. Yet, in 
spite of physical weakness, George Eliot 
possessed such inexhaustible mental energy 
that she could go on, hour after hour, looking 
with the same unflagging interest at whatever 
possessed any claim to attention, tiring out 
even vigorous men that were in her company. 
In her works the allusions to art are much 
less frequent than to music ; but from a few 
hints here and there, it is possible to form 
some idea of her taste, one very significant 
passage in ' Adam Bede ' showing her peculiar 
love of Dutch paintings, and her readiness to 
turn without shrinking *' f ron^ cloud-borne an- 



2i6 GEORGE ELIOT, 

gels, from prophets, sibyls, and heroic warriors, 
to an old woman bending over her flower- 
pot, or eating her solitary dinner, while the 
noonday light, softened perhaps by a screen 
of leaves, falls on her mob-cap, and just 
touches the rim of her spinning-wheel and 
her stone jug, and all those cheap common 
things which are the precious necessaries of 
life to her." 

Another favorite resort of George Eliot's 
was the Zoological Gardens. She went there 
a great deal to study the animals, and was 
particularly fond of the " poor dear ratel " 
that used to turn somersaults. In fact her 
knowledge of, and sympathy with, animals 
was as remarkable as that which she showed 
for human nature. Thus she astonished a 
gentleman farmer by drawing attention to 
the fine points of his horses. Her intimate 
acquaintance with the dog comes out in a 
thousand touches in her novels, and her hu- 
morous appreciation of little pigs led her to 
watch them attentively, and to pick out some 
particular favorite in every litter. In her 
country rambles, too, she was fond of turning 
over stones to inspect the minute insect life 
teeming in moist, dark places ; and she was 
as interested as Lewes himself in the crea- 
tures, frogs, etc., he kept for scientific pur- 



HER POEMS, 



217 



poses, and which would sometimes, like the 
frog in the fairy tale, surprise the household by 
suddenly making their entrance into the din- 
ing-room. Her liking for the " poor brutes," 
as she calls them, had its origin no doubt in 
the same source of profound pity which she 
feels for " the twists and cracks" of imper- 
fect human beings. 

Her evenings were usually passed at home, 
and spent in reading, or in playing and sing- 
ing ; but she and Lewes used to go to the 
theatre on any occasion of special interest, as 
when Salvini appeared in * Othello,' a per- 
formance attended repeatedly by both with 
enthusiastic delight. Otherwise they rarely 
left home, seldom visiting at other people's 
houses, although they made an exception in 
the case of a favored few. 

They were both fond of travelling, and, 
whenever it was possible, would take trips to 
the Continent, or seek some quiet English 
rural retreat away from the sleepless tumult 
of London. " For," says LeWes incidentally 
in a letter, " Mrs. Lewes never seems at home 
except under a broad sweep of sky and the 
greenth of the uplands round her." So we 
find them frequently contriving a change of 
scene ; and the visits to foreign countries, 
the pleasant sauntering on long summer days 



2 1 8 GEORGE ELIOT, 

through Continental towns, "dozing round 
old cathedrals," formed delightful episodes in 
George Eliot's strenuously active life. The 
residence in Germany in 1854, and again in 
1858, has already been alluded to. Now, in 
the year 1865, they paid a short visit to 
France, in the course of which they saw 
Normandy, Brittany, and Touraine, returning 
much refreshed at the beginning of the au- 
tumn. Two years afterwards they went to 
Spain, a country that must have possessed a 
peculiar interest for both ; for in 1846 Lewes 
had published a charming, if one-sided, little 
book on ' The Spanish Drama,' with especial 
reference to Lope de Vega and Calderon ; and 
in 1864, only a year after the appearance of 
' Romola/ George Eliot produced the first 
draught of * The Spanish Gypsy/ On be- 
coming personally acquainted with this land 
of "old romance," however, her impressions 
were so far modified and deepened that she 
re-wrote and amplified her poem, which was 
not published till 1868. 

The subject of the gypsies was probably 
suggested to George Eliot by her own mem- 
orable adventure in childhood, which thus be- 
came the germ of a very impressive poem. Be 
that as it may, it is worth noticing that the 
conception of 'The Spanish Gypsy' should 



HER POEMS. 215 

have followed so closely on the completion 
of the Italian novel, both being foreign sub- 
jects, belonging to much the same period of' 
history. In both the novelist has departed 
from her habitual track, seeking for "pas- 
tures new" in a foreign soil. After incul- 
cating on the artist the desirability of giving 
" the loving pains of a life to the faithful 
representation of commonplace things," she 
remarks in * Adam Bede ' that " there are few 
prophets in the world, few sublimely beauti- 
ful women, few heroes," and that we cannot 
afford to give all our love and reverence to 
such rarities. But having followed this rule, 
and given the most marvellously truthful de- 
lineations of her fellow-men as they are or- 
dinarily to-be met with, she. now also felt 
prompted to draw the exceptional types of 
human character, the rare prophets, and the 
sublime heroes. 

To her friend Miss Simcox, George Eliot 
one day mentioned a plan of giving "the 
world an ideal portrait of an actual character 
in history, whom she did not name, but to 
whom she alluded as an object of possible 
reverence unmingled with disappointment." 
This idea was never carried out, but at any 
rate Dinah Morris, Savonarola, Zarca, and 
Mordecai are all exceptional beings — be- 



220 GEORGE EUOT, 

ings engrossed by an impersonal aim, hav- 
ing the spiritual or national regeneration of 
their fellow-men for its object. Dinah and 
Savonarola are more of the nature of proph- 
ets ; Zarca and Mordecai of that of patriots. 
Among these the fair Methodist preacher, 
whose yearning piety is only a more subli- 
mated love of her kind, is the most vividly re- 
alized ; while Mordecai, the patriot of an ideal 
country, is but the abstraction of a man, en- 
tirely wanting in that indefinable solidity of 
presentation which gives a life of its own to 
thexreations of art. 

On the whole, Zarca, the gypsy chief, is 
perhaps the most vividly drawn of George 
Eliot*s purely ideal characters — characters 
which never have the flesh-and-blood reality 
of her Mrs. Poysers, her Silas Mamers, and 
her dear little Totties and Eppies. Yet there 
is an unmistakable grandeur and power of in- 
vention in the heroic figure of Zarca, although, 
in spite of this power, we miss the convincing 
stamp of reality in him, and not only in him, 
but more or less in all the characters of * The 
Spanish Gypsy.' George Eliot's feeling for 
the extraordinary and romantic was very sub- 
ordinate to that which she entertained for 
the more familiar aspects of our life. For, 
although she here chose one of the most 



HER POEMS. 221 

romantic of periods and localities, the Spain 
of Ferdinand and Isabella, with the mingled 
horror and magnificence of its national tra- 
ditions, she does not really succeed in resusci- 
tating the spirit which animated those devout, 
cruel, fanatical, but ultra-picturesque times. 
The Castilian noble, the Jewish astrologer, 
Zarca, and the Spanish Inquisitor, even the 
bright, gloriously conceived Fedalma herself, 
think and speak too much like sublimated 
modern positivists. For example, would, 
could, or should any gypsy of the fifteenth 
century have expressed himself in the fol- 
lowing terms : 

«* Oh, it is a faith 
Taught by no priest, but by this beating heart : 
Faith to each other : the fidelity 
Of fellow-wanderers in a desert place. 
Who share the same dire thirst, and therefore share 
The scanty water : the fidelity 
Of men whose pulses leap with kindred fire, 
Who in the flash of eyes, the clasp of hands, 
The speech that even in lying tells the truth 
Of heritage inevitable as birth. 
Nay, in the silent bodily presence feel 
The mystic stirring of a common life 
Which makes the many one : fidelity 
To the consecrating oath our sponsor Fate 
Made through our infant breath when we were bom 
The fellow-heirs of that small island. Life, 
Where we must dig and sow and reap with brothers. 
Fear thou that oath, my daughter — nay, not fear. 
But love it ; for the sanctity of oaths 



-122 GEOkGE ELIOT. 



But in the in jury wroog^t bj brokca bonds 
And in the garnered good o€ Lizman trust.'' 

The poetic mode of treatment corresponds to 
the exalted theme of 'The Spanish Gypsy/ 
a subject certainly fitted for drama or ro- 
mance rather than for the norel, properly so 
called. Nothing could apparently be better 
adapted for the purposes of a noble historical 
poem than the conception of a great man 
such as Zarca, whose aim is nothing less than 
the fusion of the scattered, wandering, lawless 
gjrpsy tribes into one nation, with common 
traditions and a common country: the roman- 
tic incident of the discovery of his lost daugh- 
ter in the aflBanced bride of SOva, Duke of 
Bedmar: the supreme conflict in Fedalma's 
breast between love and duty, her renuncia- 
tion of happiness in order to cast in her lot 
with that of her outcast people : Silva's fran- 
tic grief, his desertion of his country, his re- 
ligion, and all his solemn responsibilities to 
turn gypsy for Fedalma's sake, and having 
done so, his agony of remorse on seeing the 
fortress committed to his trust taken by the 
gypsies he has joined, his dearest friends 
massacred, his nearest of kin, Isidor, the in- 
quisitor, hanged before bis very eyes, a sight 
so maddening that, hardly conscious of his 



HER POEMS. 221 

act, he slays Zarca, and so divides himself for- 
ever, by an impassable gulf, from the woman 
for whose sake he had turned apostate. 

Clearly a subject containing the highest ca- 
pabilities, and, if great thoughts constituted 
a great poem, this should be one of the great- 
est. But with all its high merits, its senti- 
ments imbued with rare moral grandeur, its 
felicitous descriptions, the work lacks that 
best and incommunicable gift which comes 
by nature to the poet. Here, as in her nov- 
els, we find George Eliot's instinctive insight 
into the primary passions of the human heart, 
her wide sympathy and piercing keenness of 
vision ; but her thoughts, instead of being 
naturally winged with melody, seem mechani- 
cally welded into song. This applies to all 
her poetic work, although some of it, espe- 
cially * The Legend of Jubal,' reaches a much 
higher degree of metrical and rhythmical ex- 
cellence. But although George EHot's poems 
cannot be considered on a par with her prose, 
they possess a distinctive interest, and should 
be carefully studied by all lovers of her gen- 
ius, as affording a more intimate insight into 
the working of her own mind. Nowhere do 
we perceive so clearly as here the profound 
sadness of her view of life ; nowhere does she 
so emphatically reiterate the stern lesson of 



224 



GEORGE ELIOT. 



the duty of resignation and self-sacrifice ; or 
that other doctrine that the individual is bound 
absolutely to subordinate his personal happi- 
ness to the social good, that he has no rights 
save the right of fulfilling his obligations to 
his age, his country, and his family. This 
idea is perhaps more completely incorporated 
in Fedalma than in any other of her charac- 
ters — Fedalma, who seems so bountifully en- 
dowed with the fullest measure of beauty, love, 
and happiness, that her renunciation may be 
the more absolute. She who in her young 
joy suddenly knows herself as " an aged sor- 
row," exclaiming : 

" I will not take a heaven 
Haunted by shrieks of far-off misery. 
This deed and I have ripened with the hours : 
It is a part of me — a wakened thought 
That, rising like a giant, masters me, 
And grows into a doom. O mother life, 
That seemed to nourish me so tenderly. 
Even in the womb you vowed me to the fire, 
Hung on my soul the burden of men's hopes. 
And pledged me to redeem I — I'll pay the debt 
You gave me strength that I should pour it all 
Into this anguish. I can never shrink 
Back into bliss — my heart has grown too big 
With things that might be." 

This sacrifice is the completer for being with- 
out hope ; for not counting " on aught but 
being faithful ; " for resting satisfied in such 
a sublime conviction as — 



HER POEMS, 

" The grandest death, to die in vain — for love 
Greater than sways the forces of the world." 



225 



Limit forbids me dwell longer on this poem, 
which contains infinite matter for discussion, 
yet some of the single passages are so full 
of fine thoughts felicitously expressed that it 
would be unfair not to allude to them. Such 
a specimen as this exposition of the eternal 
dualism between the Hellenic and the Chris- 
tian ideals, of which Heine was the original 
and incomparable expounder, should not be 
left unnoted : 

" Forevermore 
With grander resurrection than was feigned 
Of Attila's fierce Huns, the soul of Greece 
Conquers the bulk of Persia. The maimed form 
Of calmly joyous beauty, marble-limbed, 
Yet breathing with the thought that shaped its limbs. 
Looks niild reproach from out its opened grave 
At creeds of terror ; and the vine-wreathed god 
Fronts the pierced Image with the crown of thorns.** 

And again how full of deep mysterious sug- 
gestion is this line — 

. " Speech is but broken light upon the depth 
Of the unspoken." 

And this grand sayjng — 

" What times are little ? To the sentinel 
That hour is regal when he mounts on guard.** 

Quotations of this kind might be indefinitely 
multiplied ; while showing that exaltation of 

15 



226 GEORGE ELIOT. 

thought properly belonging to poetry, they at 
the same time indubitably prove to the deli- 
cately attuned ear the absence of that subtle 
intuitive music, that " linked sweetness " of 
sound and sense which is the birthright of 
poets. If an intimate and profound acquaint- 
ance with the laws and structure 'of metre 
could bestow this quality, which appertain to 
the elemental, George Eliot's verse ought to 
have achieved the highest success. For in 
mere technical knowledge concerning rhyme, 
assonance, alliteration, and the manipulation 
of blank verse according to the most cunning 
distribution of pauses, she could hold her own 
with the foremost contemporary poets, being 
no doubt far more versed than either Shel- 
ley or Byron in the laws governing these 
matters. 

How incalculable she felt the poet's influ- 
ence to be, and how fain she would have had 
him wield this influence only for the loftiest 
ends, is well shown in a beautiful letter, 
hitherto unpublished, now possessing an added 
pathos as addressed to one who has but 
lately departed, at the very time when his 
rare poetic gifts were beginning to be more 
widely recognized. James Thomson, the 
author of "The City of Dreadful Night," a 
poem which appeared first in the pages of 



HER POEMS. 227 

the National Reformer, with the signature 
of " B. v./' was thus addressed by George 
Eliot : 

" Dear Poet, — I cannot rest satisfied 
without telling you that my mind responds 
with admiration to the distinct vision and 
grand utterance in the poem which you have 
been so good as to send me. 

"Also, I trust that an intellect informed 
by so much passionate energy as yours will 
soon give us more heroic strains, with a wider 
embrace of human fellowship, such as will be 
to the laborers of the world what the Odes 
of Tyrtaeus were to the Spartans, thrilling 
them with the sublimity of the social order 
and the courage of resistance to all that 
would dissolve it. To accept life and write 
much fine poetry, is to take a very large share 
in the quantum of human good, and seems 
to draw with it necessarily some recognition, 
affectionate, and even joyful, of the manifold 
willing labors which have made such a lot 
possible." 

These words are of peculiar interest, be- 
cause, although the writer of them is almost 
as much of a pessimist as its recipient, they 
are so with a difference. The pessimism of 
" The City of Dreadful Night," in its blank 
hopelessness, paralyzes the inmost nerve of 



228 GEORGE ELIOT. 

life by isolating the individual in cold ob- 
struction. Whereas George Eliot, while rec- 
ognizing to the utmost "the burthen of a 
world, where even the sunshine has a heart 
of care," insists the more on the fact that 
this common suffering binds man more indis- 
solubly to man ; that so far from justifying 
him in ending his life "when he will," the 
groaning and travailing generations exact that 
he should stand firm at his post, regardless 
of personal consideration or requital, so long 
only as he can help towards making the fate 
of his fellow-mortals less heavy for them to 
bear. In fact, the one is a theory of life, the 
other a disease of the soul. 

The same stoic view, in a different form, 
finds expression in this answer to a dear 
friend's query : " I cannot quite agree that it 
is hard to see what has been the good of your 
life. It seems to me very clear that you have 
been a good of a kind that would have been 
sorely missed by those who have been nearest 
to you, and also by some who are more dis- 
tant. And it is this kind of good which must 
reconcile us to life, and not any answer to 
the question, * What would the universe have 
been without me } * The point one has to 
care for is, * Are A, B, and C the better for 
me ? ' And there are several letters of the 



HER POEMS. 



229 



alphabet that could not have easily spared 
you in the past, and that can still less spare 
you in the present.*' 

This lesson of , resignation, which is en- 
forced more and more stringently in her 
writings, is again dwelt upon with peculiar 
emphasis in the interesting dramatic sketch 
entitled ' Armgart.* The problem here is not 
unlike that in * Silas Marner.' It is that of 
an individual, in exceptional circumstances, 
brought back to the average condition of 
humanity ; but whereas Silas, having sunk 
below the common standard, is once more 
united to his fellow-men by love, the magnifi- 
cently endowed Armgart, who seems some- 
thing apart and above the crowd, is reduced 
to the level of the undistinguished million 
by the loss of her peerless voice. * Armgart* 
is the single instance, excepting, perhaps, the 
Princess Halm-Eberstein, where George Eliot 
has attempted to depict the woman-artist, to 
whom life's highest object consists in fame — 

** The benignant strength of one, transformed 
To joy of many.*' 

But in the intoxicating flush of success, the 
singer, who has refused the love of one for 
that " sense transcendent which can taste the 
joy of swaying multitudes,*' loses her glorious 
gift, and so sinks irretrievably to a " drudge 



230 



GEORGE ELIOT, 



among the crowd." In the first delirium of 
despair she longs to put an end to herself, 
"sooner than bear the yoke of thwarted life;" 
but is painfully startled from her defiant mood 
by the indignant query of Walpurga, her 
humble cousin — 

" Where is the rebel's right for joa alone ? 
Noble rebellion lifts z. cpminon load ; 
Bat what is he who flings his own load off 
And leaves his fellows toiling ? Rebel's right ? 
Say rather the deserter's. Oh, jon smiled 
From jour dear height on all the millioa lots 
Which jet joa brand as abjecL" 

It may seem singular that having once, in 
'Armgart,' drawn a woman of the highest 
artistic aims and ambitions, George Eliot 
should imply that what is most valuable in 
her is not the exceptional gift, but rather that 
part of her nature which she shares with 
ordinary humanity. This is, however, one 
of her leading beliefs, and strongly contrasts 
her, as a teacher, with Carlyle- To the 
author of * Hero Worship ' the promiscuous 
mass — moiling and toiling as factory hands 
and artisans, as miners and laborers — only 
represents so much raw material, from which 
is produced that final result and last triumph 
of the combination of human forces — the 
great statesman, great warrior, great poet, 
and so forth. To George Eliot, on the con- 



HER POEMS. 



231 



trary — and this is the democratic side of her 
nature — it is the multitude, so charily treated 
by destiny, which claims deepest sympathy 
and tenderest compassion ; so that all great- 
ness, in her eyes, is not a privilege, but a 
debt, which entails on its possessor a more 
strenuous effort, a completer devotion to the 
service of average humanity. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

FELIX HOLT AND MIDDLEMARCH. 

^ In 'Felix Holt/ which was published in 1866, 
George Eliot returned once more to her own 
peculiar field, where she stands supreme and 
unrivalled — the novel of English provincial 
life. This work, which, however, is not equal 
to her earlier or later fictions, yet possesses a 
double interest for us. It is the only one of 
her writings from which its author's political 
views may be inferred, if we exclude a paper 
published in Blackwood" s Magazine in Jan- 
uary 1868, which, indeed, seems to be part of 
the novel, seeing that it is entitled " Address 
to Working Men, by Felix Holt." / The pa- 
per contains, in a more direct and concise 
form, precisely the same general views as 
regards the principles of government which 
were previously enunciated through Felix the 
Radical./ It was an appeal to the operative 
classes who had been only recently enfran- 
chised by the Reform Bill. Its advice is 
mainly to the effect that genuine political 



FELIX HOLT. 



233 



and social improvements to be durable must 
be the result of inward change rather than of 
outward legislation. The writer insists on 
the futility of the belief that beneficial polit- 
ical changes can be effected by revolutionary 
measures. She points out the necessity of a 
just discrimination between what is curable 
in the body politic and what has to be en- 
dured. She dwells once again, with solemn 
insistence, on the " aged sorrow," the inheri- 
tance of evil transmitted from generation to 
generation, an evil too intimately entwined 
with the complex conditions of society to be 
violently uprooted, but only to be gradually 
eradicated by the persistent cultivation of 
knowledge, industry, judgment, sobriety, and 
patience. 

" This is only one example," she says, " of 
the law by which human lives are linked to- 
gether ; another example of what we com- 
plain of when we point to our pauperism, to 
the brutal ignorance of multitudes among our 
fellow-countrymen, to the weight of taxation 
laid on us by blamable wars, to the wasteful 
channels made for the public money, to the 
expense and trouble of getting justice, and 
call these the effects of bad rule. This is the 
law that we all bear the yoke of ; the law of 
no man's making, and which no man can 



234 



GEORGE ELIOT. 



undo. , Everybody now sees an example of it 
in the case of Ireland. We who are living 
now are sufferers by the wrong-doing of those 
who lived before us ; we are sufferers by each 
other's wrong-doing; and the children who 
come after us will be sufferers from the same 



causes." 



To remedy this long-standing wrong-doing 
and suffering, so argues Felix Holt, is not in 
the power of any one measure, class, or pe- 
riod. It would be childish folly to expect any 
Reform Bill to possess the magical property 
whereby a sudden social transformation could 
be accomplished. On the contrary, abrupt 
transitions should be shunned as dangerous to 
order and law, which alone are certain to in- 
sure a steady collective progress ; the only 
ineans to this end consisting in the general 
spread of education, to secure which, at least 
for his children, the working man should 
spare no pains. Without knowledge, the 
writer continues, no political measures will be 
of any benefit, ignorance with or without vote 
always of necessity engendering vice and mis- 
ery. But, guided by a fuller knowledge, the 
working classes would be able to discern what 
sort of men they should choose for their rep- 
resentatives, and instead of electing "plat- 
form swaggerers, who bring us nothing but 



FELIX HOLT, 235 

the ocean to make our broth with," they 
would confide the chief power to the hands 
of the truly wise, those who know how to 
regulate life "according to the truest princi- 
ples mankind is in possession of." 

The " Felix Holt " of the story is described 
by George Eliot as shaping his actions much 
according to the ideas which are here theoret- 
ically expressed. His knowledge and apti- 
tude would enable him to choose what is 
considered a higher calling. But he scorns 
the vulgar ambition called " getting on in the 
world ; " his sense of fellowship prompting 
him to remain a simple artisan that he may 
exert an elevating influence on the class to 
which he belongs. Class differences, so ar- 
gues this Radical-Conservative, being inher- 
ent in the constitution of society, it becomes 
something of a desertion to withdraw what 
abilities one may have from the medium 
where they are urgently needed, in order to 
join, for the sake of selfish aims, some other 
body of men where they may be superfluous. 

The other distinctive feature of 'Felix Holt' 
consists in its elaborate construction, ranking 
it, so to speak, amongst sensation novels. (As a 
rule, George Eliot's stories have little or no plot, 
the incidents seeming not so much invented 
by the writer for the sake of producing an 



236 GEORGE ELIOT. 

efifective work, as to be the natural result of the 
friction between character and circumstance. 
This s implicity of narrative belongs, no doubt, 
to the highest class of novel, the class to 
which ' The Vicar of Wakefield,' ' Waverley,' 
and 'Vanity Fair' belong. In 'Felix Holt,' 
however, the intricate network of incident in 
which the characters seem to be enmeshed, 
is not unlike the modem French art of story- 
telling, with its fertility of invention, as is also 
the strangely repellent intrigue which forms 
the nucleus of the whole. All the elements 
which go to make up a thrilling narrative — 
such as a dubious inheritance, the disappear- 
ance of the rightful claimant, a wife's guilty 
secret, the involvements of the most desperate 
human fates in a perplexing coil through sin 
and error — are interwoven in this story of 
' Felix Holt the Radical' 

Though ingeniously invented, the different 
incidents seem not so much naturally to have 
grown the one from the other as to be con- 
structed with too conscious a seeking for 
effect. There is something forced, uneasy, 
and inadequate in the laborious contrivance of 
fitting one set of events on to another, and 
the machinery of the disputed Transome 
claim is so involved that the reader never 
masters the " ins " and " outs " of that baf- 



; 



FELIX HOLT. 



237 



fling mystery. Still, the groundwork of the 
story is deeply impressive : its interest is, 
notwithstanding the complex ramification of 
events, concentrated with much power upon 
a small group of personages, such as Mrs. 
Transome, her son Harold, the little dissent- 
ing minister, Ruf us Lyon, Esther, and Felix 
Holt. Here, as elsewhere, the novelist reveals 
the potent qualities of her genius. Not only 
does this story contain such geijuine humorous 
portraiture as the lachrymose Mrs. Holt, and 
the delightfully quaint Job Tudge, but it is 
also enriched by some descriptions of rural 
scenery and of homely existence in remote 
country districts as admirable as any to be 
found in her writings. Rufus Lyon is a 
worthy addition to that long gallery of cleri- 
cal portraits which are among the triumphs 
of George Eliot's art. This "singular-look- 
ing apostle of the meeting in Skipper's Lane " 
— with his rare purity of heart, his unworld- 
liness, his zeal in the cause of dissent, his 
restless argumentative spirit, and the mov- 
ing memories of romance and passion hidden 
beneath the odd, quaint physique of the little 
minister encased in rusty black — is among 
the most loving and lovable of characters, and 
recalls more particularly that passage in the 
poem entitled *A Minor Prophet,* which I 



238 



GEORGE ELIOT. 



cannot but think one of the author's finest, 
the passage beginning — 

" The pathos exquisite of lovely minds 
Hid in harsh forms — not penetrating them 
Like fire divine within a common bosh 
Which glows transfigured by the heavenly guest. 
So that men put their shoes off ; but encaged 
Like a sweet child within some thick-walled cell. 
Who leaps and fails to hold the window-bars. 
But having shown a little dimpled hand. 
Is visited thenceforth by tender hearts 
Whose eyes keep watch about the prison walls." 

Esther, on the other hand, is one of those 
fortunate beings whose lovely mind is lodged 
in a form of corresponding loveliness. This 
charming Esther, though not originally with- 
out her feminine vanities and worldly desires, 
is one of those characters dear to George 
Eliot's heart, who renounce the allurements 
of an easy pleasurable existence for the higher 
satisfactions of a noble love or a nobler ideal 
It is curious to notice that Eppie, Esther, 
Fedalma, and Daniel Deronda are all children 
that have been reared in ignorance of their 
real parentage, and that to all of them there 
comes a day when a more or less difficult 
decision has to be made, when for good or 
evil they have to choose, once for all, between 
two conflicting claims. Like Eppie, Esther 
rejects the advantages of birth and fortune, 
and elects to share the hard but dignified life 



FELIX HOLT. 



239 



of the high-minded Felix. But this decision 
in her case shows even higher moral worth, 
because by nature she is so keenly susceptible 
to the delicate refinements and graceful ele- 
gancies which are the natural accompaniment 
of rank and wealth. 

The most curious feature of this book con- 
sists, perhaps, in its original treatment of illicit 
passion. Novelists, as a rule,' when handling 
this subject, depict its fascinations in brilliant 
contrast to the sufferings and terrors which 
follow in its train. But George Eliot contents 
herself with showing us the reverse side of the 
medal. Youth has faded, joy is dead, love 
has turned to loathing, yet memory, like a 
relentless fury, pursues the gray-haired Mrs. 
Transome, who hides within her breast such 
a heavy load of shame and dread. The power 
and intensity with which this character of the 
haughty, stern, yet inwardly quailing woman 
is drawn are unsurpassed in their way, and 
there is tragic horror in the recoil of her 
finest sensibilities from the vulgar, mean, 
self-complacent lawyer, too thick-skinned ever 
to know that in his own person he is a daily 
judgment on her whose life has been made 
hideous for his sake. Never more impres- 
sively than here does the novelist enforce her 
teaching that the deed follows the doer, being 



240 



GEORGE EUOT, 



imbued with an incalculable vitality of its own, 
shaping all after life, and subduing to its guise 
the nature that is in bondage to it. Like 
those fabled dragon's teeth planted by Cad- 
mus, which sprung up again as armed men, 
spreading discord and ruin, so a man's evil 
actions seem endowed with independent voli- 
tion, and their consequences extend far beyond 
the individual life where they originated. 

If ' Felix Holt * is the most intricately con- 
structed of George Eliot's novels, 'Middle- 
march,' which appeared five years afterwards, 
is, on the other hand, a story without a plot 
In fact, it seems hardly appropriate to call it 
a novel. Like Hogarth's serial pictures rep- 
resenting the successive stages in their prog- 
ress through life of certain typical characters, 
so in this book there is unrolled before us, 
not so much the history of any particular in- 
dividual, as a whole phase of society portrayed 
with as daring and uncompromising a fidelity 
to Nature as that of Hogarth himself. In 
' Middlemarch,' English provincial life in the 
first half of the nineteenth century is indelibly 
fixed in words " holding a universe impalpa- 
ble " for the apprehension and delight of the 
furthest generations of English-speaking na- 
tions. Here, as in some kind of panorama, 
sections of a community and groups of char- 



MIDDLEMARCH, 



241 



acter pass before the mind's eye. To dwell 
on the separate, strongly individualized figures 
which constitute this great cro>yd would be 
impossible within the present limits. But 
from the county people such as the Brookes 
and Chettams, to respectable middle-class 
families of the Vincy and Garth type, down 
to the low, avaricious, harpy-tribes of the 
Waules and Featherstones, every unit of this 
complex social agglomeration is described 
with a life-like vividness truly amazing, when 
the number and vajriety of the characters 
especially are considered. I know not where 
else in literature to look for a work which 
leaves such a strong impression on the read- 
er's mind of the intertexture of human lives. 
Seen thus in perspective, each separate indi- 
viduality, with its specialized consciousness, 
is yet as indissolubly connected with the col- 
lective life as that of the indistinguishable 
zoophyte which is but a sentient speck neces- 
sarily moved by the same vital agency which 
stirs the entire organism. 

Among the figures which stand out most 
prominently from the crowded background 
are Dorothea, Lydgate, Casaubon, Rosamond 
Vincy, Ladislaw, Bulstrode, Caleb, and Mary 
Garth. Dorothea belongs to that stately type 

of womanhood, such as Romola and Fedalma, 

16 



242 



GEORGE ELIOT, 



a type which seems to be specifically George 
Eliot's own, and which has perhaps more in 
common with such Greek ideals as Antigone 
and Iphigenia, than with more modern hero- 
ines. But Dorothea, however lofty her aspi- 
rations, has not the Christian heroism of 
Romola, or the antique devotion of Fedalma. 
She is one of those problematic natures 
already spoken of ; ill-adjusted to her circum- 
stances, and never quite adjusting circum- 
stances to herself. It is true that her high 
aims and glorious possibilities are partially 
stifled by a social medium where there seems 
no demand for them : still the resolute soul 
usually finds some way in which to work out 
its destiny. 

" Many * Theresas,' " says George Eliot, 
"have been born who found for themselves 
no epic life wherein there was a constant un- 
folding of far-resonant action ; perhaps only 
a life of mistakes, the offspring of a cer- 
tain spiritual grandeur ill-matched with the 
meanness of opportunity ; perhaps * a tragic 
failure which found no sacred poet, and sank 
unwept into oblivion. With dim lights and 
tangled circumstance they tried to shape their 
thought and deed in noble agreement ; but, 
after all, to common eyes, their struggles 
seemed mere inconsistency and formlessness ; 



MIDDLEMARCH. 



243 



for these later-born 'Theresas' were helped 
by no coherent social faith and order which 
could perform the function of knowledge for 
the ardently willing soul. 

** Some have felt that these blundering lives 
are due to the inconvenient indefiniteness with 
which the Supreme Power has fashioned the 
natures of women ; if there were one level of 
feminine incompetence as strict as the ability 
to count three and no more, the social lot of 
woman might be treated with scientific certi- 
tude. Meanwhile the indefiniteness remains, 
and the limits of variation are really much 
wider than any one would imagine from the 
sameness of women's coiffure, and the favorite 
love-stories in prose and verse." 

Such a life of mistakes is that of the beauti- 
ful Dorothea, the ill-starred wife of Casaubon. 
In his way the character of Casaubon is as 
great a triumph as that of Tito himself. The 
novelist seems to have crept into the inmost 
recesses of that uneasy consciousness, to have 
probed the most sensitive spots of that disr 
eased vanity, and to lay bare before our eyes 
the dull labor of a brain whose ideas are still- 
born. In an article by Mr. Myers it is stated, 
however incredible it may sound, that an 
undiscriminating friend once condoled with 
George Eliot on the melancholy experience 



244 GEORGE ELIOT. 

which, from her knowledge of Lewes, had 
taught her to depict the gloomy character of 
Casaubon ; whereas, in fact, there could not be 
a more striking contrast than that between 
the pedant groping amid dim fragments of 
knowledge, and the vivacious litt^ateur and 
thinker with his singular mental energy and 
grasp of thought. On the novelist's laugh- 
ingly assuring him that such was by no means 
the case, " From whom, then," persisted he, 
" did you draw ' Casaubon ' ? " With a hu- 
morous solemnity, which was quite in earnest, 
she pointed to her own heart. She confessed, 
on the other hand, having found the character 
of Rosamond Vincy difficult to sustain, such 
CQmplacency-x>£-egoism, as has been pointed 
out, being alien to her own habit of mind. 
But she laid no claim to any such natural 
magnanimity as could avert Casaubon's temp- 
tations of jealous vanity, and bitter resent- 
ment. 

If there is any character in whom one may 
possibly trace some suggestions of Lewes, it 
/is in the versatile, brilliant, talented Ladislaw, 
who held, that while genius must have the 
utmost play for its spontaneity, it may await 
with confidence "those messages from the 
universe which ' summon it to its peculiar 
work, only placing itself in an attitude of 



MIDDLEMARCH. 



245 



receptivity towards all sublime chances." But 
however charming, the impression Ladislaw 
produces is that of a somewhat shallow, frothy 
character, so that he seems almost as ill-fitted 
for Dorothea as the dreary Casaubon himself. 
Indeed the heroine's second marriage seems 
almost as much a failure as the stultifying 
union of Lydgate with Rosamond Vincy, and 
has altogether a more saddening effect than 
the tragic death of Maggie, which is how 
much less pitiful than that death in life of 
the fashionable doctor, whose best aims and 
vital purposes have been killed by his wife. 



Much might be said of Bulstrode,-the sanc- 
timonious hypocrite, who is yet not altogether 
a hypocrite, but has a vein of something re- 
sembling goodness running through his crafty 
character; of Farebrother, the lax, amiable, 
genuinely honorable vicar of St. Botolph's ; 
of Mrs. Cadwallader, the glib-tongued, witty, 
meddling rector's wife, a kind of Mrs. Poyser 
of high life ; of Caleb Garth, whose devotion 
to work is a religion, and whose likeness to 
Mr. Robert Evans has already been^ pointed 
out ; of the whole-hearted, sensible Mary, and 
of many other supremely vivid characters, 
whom to do justice to would carry us too 
far. 

* Middlemarch ' is the only work of George 



246 GEORGE ELIOT. 

Eliot's, I believe, in which there is a distinct 
indication of her attitude towards the aspira- 
tions and clearly formulated demands of the 
women of the nineteenth century. Her many 
sarcastic allusions to the stereotyped t^jeory 
about woman's sphere show on which side her 
sympathies were enlisted. On the whole, she 
was more partial to the educa^tional movement 
than to that other agitation which aims at se- 
curing the political enfranchisement of women. 
How sincerely she had the first at heart is 
shown by the donation of 50/. "From the 
author of ' Romola,' " when Girton College 
was first started. And in a letter to a young 
lady who studied there, and in whose career 
she was much interested, she says, ** the pros- 
perity of Girton is very satisfactory." Among 
her most intimate friends, too, were some of 
the ladies who had initiated and organized 
the Women's Suffrage movement. Likewise 
.writing to Miss Phelps, she alludes to the 
Woman's Lectureship in Boston, and remarks 
concerning the new University: "An office 
that may make a new precedent in social 
advance, and which is at the very least an 
experiment that ought to be tried. America 
is the seed-ground and nursery of new ideals, 
where they can grow in a larger, freer air 
than our&" 



MIDDLEMARCH. 247 

In 1871, the year when ' Middlemarch ' was 
appearing in parts, George Eliot spent part of 
the spring and summer months at Shotter- 
mill, a quaint Hampshire village situated amid 
a landscape that unites beauties of the most 
varied kind. Here we may imagine her and 
Mr. Lewes, after their day's work was done, 
either seekiag the vast stretch of heath and 
common only bounded by the horizon, or 
strolling through the deep-sunk lanes, or find- 
ing a soothing repose in " places of nestling 
green for poets made." They had rented 
Brookbank, an old-fashioned cottage with 
tiled roof and Jattice-paned windows, belong- 
ing to Mrs. Gilchrist, the widow of the distin- 
guished biographer of William Blake. 

The description of Mrs. Meyrick's house in 
' Daniel Deronda *^ " where the narrow spaces 
of wall held a world-history in scenes and 
heads," may have been suggested by her 
present abode, rich in original drawings by 
Blake, and valuable prints, and George Eliot 
writes : " If I ever steal anything in my life, 
I think it will be the two little Sir Joshuas 
over the drawing-room mantelpiece." At this 
time she and Mr. Lewes also found intense 
interest in reading the ' Life of Blake.' Some 
correspondence, kindly placed at my disposal 
by Mrs. Gilchrist, passed between this lady 



248 GEORGE ELIOT. 

and the Leweses in connection with the let- 
ting of the house, giving interesting glimpses 
into the domesticities of the latter. Their 
habits here, as in London, were of clock- 
work regularity, household arrangements be- 
ing expected to run on wheels. " Every- 
thing," writes George Eliot, " goes on slowly 
at Shottermill, and the mode of narration is 
that typified in * This is the house that Jack 
built/ But there is an exquisite stillness in 
the sunshine and a sense of distance from 
London hurry, which encourages the growth 
of patience. 

*'Mrs. G 's*' (their one servant) "pace 

is proportionate to the other slownesses, but 
she impresses me as a worthy person, and 
her cooking — indeed, all her attendance on 
us — is of satisfactory quality. But we find 
the awkwardness of having only one person 
in the house, as well as -the advantage (this 
latter being quietude). The butcher does not 
bring the meat, everybody grudges selling 
new milk, eggs are scarce, and an expedition 
we made yesterday in search of fowls, showed 
us nothing more hopeful than some chickens 
six weeks old, which the good woman ob- 
served were sometimes * eaten by the gentry 
with asparagus.' Those eccentric people, the 
gentry ! 



MIDDLEMARCH. 249 

" But have we not beerv reading about the 
siege of Paris all the winter, and shall we 
complain • while we get excellent bread and 

butter and many etceteras ? . . . Mrs. S 

kindly sent us a dish of asparagus, which we 
ate (without the skinny chicken) and had a 
feast. 

" You will imagine that we are as fond of 
eating as Friar Tuck — I am enlarging so on 
our commissariat. But you will also infer 
that ?ve have no great evils to complain of, 
since I make so much of the small." 

George Eliot rarely went out in the day- 
time during her stay at Shottermill, but in 
the course of her rambles she would some- 
times visit such cottagers in remote places as 
were not likely to know who she was. She 
used also to go and see a farmer's wife living 
at a short distance from Brookbank, with 
whom she would freely chat about the growth 
of fruits and vegetables and the quality of 
butter, much to the astonishment of the sim- 
ple farm people. Speaking of her recollection 
of the great novelist to an American lady by 
whom these facts are recorded, the old coun- 
trywoman remarked : " It were wonderful, 
just wonderful, the sight o* green peas that I 
sent down to that gentleman and lady every 
week." 



250 



GEORGE ELIOT, 



After the lapse of a few months spent in 
this sweet rural retreat, George Eliot again 
writes to Mrs. Gilchrist : " I did not imagine 
that I should ever be so fond of the place as I 
am now. The departure of the bitter winds, 
some improvement in my health, and the 
gradual revelation of fresh and fresh beauties 
in the scenery, especially under a hopeful sky 
such as we have sometimes had — all these 
conditions have made me love our little world 
here, and wish not to quit it until we can 
settle in our London home. I have the re- 
gret of thinking that it was my original indif- 
ference about it (I hardly ever like things 
until they are familiar) that hindered us from 
securing the cottage until the end of Sep- 
tember." 

George Eliot's conscientiousness and pre- 
cision in the small affairs of life are exem- 
plified in her last note to Mrs. Gilchrist : 
'* After Mr. Lewes had written to you, I was 
made aware that a small dessert or bread- 
and-butter dish had been broken. That arch- 
sinner, the cat, was credited with the guilt. 

I am assured by Mrs. G that nothing 

else has been injured during her reign, and 

Mrs. L confirmed the statement to me 

yesterday. I wish I could replace the unfor- 
tunate dish. . . . This note, of course, needs 



MIDDLEMARCH. 251 

no answer, and it is intended simply to make 
me a clean breast about the crockery." 

About this time George Eliot was very 
much out of health : indeed, both she and 
Lewes repeatedly speak of themselves as 
"two nervous, dyspeptic creatures, two ail- 
ing, susceptible bodies," to whom slight in- 
conveniences are injurious and upsetting. 
Although it was hot summer weather, Mrs. 
Lewes suffered much from cold, sitting always 
with artificial heat to her feet. One broiling 
day in August, after she had left Brookbank, 
and taken another place in the neighborhood, 
an acquaintance happening to call on her, 
found her sitting in the garden writing, as 
was her wont, her head merely shaded by a 
deodora, on the lawn. Being expostulated 
with by her visitor for her imprudence in 
exposing herself to the full blaze of the mid- 
day sun, she replied, " Oh, I like, it ! To-day 
is the first time I have felt warm this sum- 
mer." 

They led a most secluded life, George Eliot 
being at this time engaged with the contin- 
uation of * Middlemarch ; * and Lewes, alluding 
to their solitary habits, writes at this date : 
" Work goes ' on smoothly away from all 
friendly interruptions. Lord Houghton says 
that it is incomprehensible how we can live 



252 GEORGE ELIOT. 

in such Simeon Stylites fashion, as we often 
do, all alone — but the fact is we never are 
alone when alone. And I sometimes marvel 
how it is I have contrived to get through so 
much work livings in London. It's true I'm 
a London child." Occasionally, however, they 
would go and see Tennyson, whose house is 
only three miles from Shottermill, but the road 
being all uphill made the ride a little tedious 
and uncomfortable, especially to George Eliot 
who had not got over her old nervousness. 
The man who used to drive them on these 
occasions was so much struck by this that he 
told the lady who has recorded these details 
in the Century Magazine: " Withal her being 
such a mighty clever body, she were very 
nervous in a carriage — allays wanted to go 
on a smooth road, and seemed dreadful feared 
of being thrown out." On one of these oc- 
casional meetings with Tennyson, the poet 
got involved in a conversation with the nov- 
elist concerning evolution and such weighty 
questions. They had been walking together 
in close argument, and as the Poet-Laureate 
bade George Eliot farewell, he called to her, 
already making her way down the hill, " Well, 
good-by, you and your molecules ! " And she, 
looking back, said in her deep low voice (which 
always got lower when she was at all 'roused), 
" I am Quite content with my molecules." 



MIDDLEMARCH. 253 

The country all around Shottermill with its 
breezy uplands, its pine-clad hills, its undu- 
lating tracts of land purpled with heath in 
the autumn, became more and more endeared 
to George Eliot, who, indeed, liked it better 
than any scenery in England. Here she 
could enjoy to the full that "sense of stand- 
ing on a round world." which, she writes to 
Mrs. Gilchrist who had used the phrase,* "was 
precisely what she most cared for amongst 
out-ofnJoor delights. Some years afterwards 
we find her and Mr. Lewes permanently taking 
a house not far off, at Witley in Surrey, which 
has the same kind of beautiful open scenery. 
Writing from her town residence about it to 
her old friend Mrs. Bray, George Eliot says : 
"We, too, are thinking of a new settling 
down, for we have bought a house in Surrey 
about four miles from Godalming on a grav- 
elly hill among the pine-trees, but with neigh- 
bors to give us a sense of security. Our 
present idea is that we shall part with this 
house and give up London except for occa- 
sional visits. We shall be on the same line 
of railway with some good friends at Wey- 
bridge and Guildford/' 



CHAPTER XIV. 



DANIEL D£RONDA« 



* Daniel Deronda/ which appeared five years 
after * Middlemarch/ occupies a place apart 
among George Eliot's novels. In the spirit 
which animates it, it has perhaps the closest 
affinity with * The Spanish G)'psy/ Speaking 
of this work to a young friend of Jewish 
extraction (in whose career George Eliot felt 
keen interest), she expressed surprise at the 
amazement which her choice of a subject 
had created. " I wrote about the Jews," she 
remarked, "because I consider them a fine 
old race who have done great things for hu- 
manity. I feel the same admiration for them 
as I do for the Florentines. Only lately I 
have heard to my great satisfaction that an 
influential member of the Jewish community 
is going to start an emigration to Palestine. 
You will also be glad to learn that Helmholtz 
is a Jew." 

These observations are valuable as afford- 
ing a key to the leading motive of 'Daniel 



DANIEL DERONDA. 255 

Deronda.' Mordecai's ardent desire to found 
a new national state in Palestine is not simply 
the author's dramatic realization of the feeling 
of an enthusiast, but expresses her own very 
definite sentiments on the subject. The Jew- 
ish apostle is, in fact, more or less the mouth- 
piece of George Eliot's own opinions on 
Judaism, For so great a master in the art 
of creating character, this type of the loftiest 
kind of man is curiously unreal. Mordecai 
delivers himself of the most eloquent and 
exalted views and sentiments, yet his own 
personality remains so vague and nebulous 
that it has no power of kindling the imagi- 
nation. Mordecai is meant for a Jewish Maz- 
zini. Within his consciousness he harbors 
the future of a people. He feels himself 
destined to become the savior of his race ; 
yet he does not convince us of his greatness. 
He convinces us no more than he does the 
mixed company at the '* Hand and Banner," 
which listens with pitying' incredulity to his 
passionate harangues. Nevertheless the first 
and final test of the religious teacher or of 
the social reformer is the magnetic force with 
which his own intense beliefs become binding 
on the consciences of others, if only of a few. 
It is true Mordecai secures one disciple — 
the man destined to translate his thought 



256 GEORGE ELIOT, 

into action, Daniel Deronda, as shadowy, as 
puppet-like, as lifeless as Ezra Mordecai Cohen 
. himself. These two men, of whom the one 
is the spiritual leader and the other the hero 
destined to realize his aspirations, are prob- 
ably the two most unsuccessful of George 
Eliot's vast gallery of characters. They are 
the representatives of an idea, but the idea 
has never been made flesh. A succinct ex- 
pression of it may be gathered from the 
following passage : 

"Which among the chief of the Gentile 
nations has not an ignorant multitude.? They 
scorn our people's ignorant observance ; but 
the most accursed ignorance is that which 
has no observance — sunk to the cunning 
greed of the fox, to which all law is no more 
than a trap or the cry of the worrying hound. 
There is a degradation deep down below the 
memory that has withered into superstition. 
For the multitude of the ignorant on three 
continents who observe our rites and make 
the confession of the Divine Unity the Lord 
of Judaism is not dead. Revive the organic 
centre: let the unity of Israel which has 
made the growth and form of its religion be 
an outward reality. Looking towards a land 
and a polity, our dispersed people in all the 
ends of the earth may share the dignity of a 



INTRODUCTORY. 7 

one feel the very heartbeats of womanhood in 
those powerful utterances that seem to spring 
from some central emotional energy ? Again, 
does not Mrs, Browning occupy a unique 
place among poets? Is there not a distinc- 
tively womanly strain of emotion in the throb- 
bing tides of her' high-wrought melodious 
song ? And, to come to George Eliot her- 
self, will any one deny that, in the combi- 
nation of sheer intellectual power with an 
unparalleled vision for the homely details of 
life, she takes precedence of all writers of 
this or any other country ? To some extent 
this wonderful woman conforms to her own 
standard. She undoubtedly adds to the com- 
mon fund of crystallized human experience, 
as literature might be called, something which 
is specifically feminine. But, on the other 
hand, her intellect excels precisely in those 
qualities habitually believed to be masculine, 
one of its chief characteristics consisting in 
the grasp of abstract philosophical ideas. 
This faculty, however, by no means impairs 
those instinctive processes of the imagina- 
tion by which true artistic work is produced ; 
George Eliot combining-in an unusual degree 
the subtlest power of analysis with that happy 
gift of genius which enabled her to create 
^ such characters as Amos Barton, Hetty, Mrs. 



\ 



258 GEORGE ELIOT, 

observances of her Hebrew father, breaks 
away from the " bondage of having been born 
a Jew," from which she wishes to relieve her 
son by parting from him in infancy, Mirah, 
brought up in disregard, "even in disUke of 
her Jewish origin,*' clings with inviolable te- 
nacity to the memory of that origin and to the 
fellowship of her people. The author leaves 
one in little doubt as to which side her own 
sympathies incline towards. She is not so 
much the arti3t here, impartially portraying 
different kinds of characters, as the special 
pleader proclaiming that one set of motives 
are righteous, just, and praiseworthy, as well 
as that the others are mischievous and repre- 
hensible. 

This seems carrying the principle of na- 
tionality to an extreme, if not pernicious 
length. If there were never any breaking 
up of old forms of society, any fresh blend- 
ing of nationalities and races, we should soon 
reduce Europe to another China. This un- 
wavering faithfulness to the traditions of the 
past may become a curse to the living. A 
rigidity as unnatural as it is dangerous would 
be the result of too tenacious a clinging to 
inherited memories. For if this doctrine were 
strictly carried out, such a country as Amer- 
ica, where there is a slow amalgamation of 



DANIEL DERONDA, 



259 



many allied and even heterogeneous races 
into a new nation, would practically become 
impossible. Indeed, George Eliot does not 
absolutely hold these views. She considers 
them necessary at present in order to act as 
a drag to the too rapid transformations of 
society. In the most interesting paper of 
' Theophrastus Such,' that called * The Mod- 
ern Hep ! Hep ! Hep ! ' she remarks : " The 
tendency of things is towards quicker or 
slower fusion of races. It is impossible to 
arrest this tendency ; all we can do is to mod- 
erate its course so as to hinder it from de- 
grading the moral status of societies by a too 
rapid effacement of those national traditions 
and customs which are the language of the 
national genius — the deep suckers of healthy 
sentiment. Such moderating and guidance of 
inevitable movement is worthy of all effort." 

Considering that George Eliot was con- 
vinced of this modern tendency towards fu- 
sion, it is all the more singular that she 
should, in * Daniel Deronda,' have laid such 
stress on th^ reconstruction, after the lapse 
of centuries, of a Jewish state ; singular, when 
one considers that many of the most eminent 
Jews, so far from aspiring towards such an 
event, hardly seem to have contemplated it as 
a desirable or possible prospect. The sym- 



1 



26o GEORGE ELIOT. 

pathies of Spinoza, the Mendelssohns, Rahel, 
Meyerbeer, Heine, and many others, are not 
distinctively Jewish but humanitarian. And 
the grandest, as well as truest thing that has 
been uttered about them is that saying of 
Heine's : " The country of the Jews is the 
ideal, is God." 

Indeed, to have a true conception of Jew- 
ish nature and character, of its brilliant lights 
and deep shadows, of its pathos, depth, sub- 
limity, degradation, and wit ; of its infinite re- 
source and boundless capacity for suffering — 
one must go to Heine and not to ' Daniel 
Deronda.' In * Jehuda-ben-Halevy' Heine ex- 
presses the love and longing of a Jewish heart 
for Jerusalem in accents of such piercing in- 
tensity that compared with it, " Mordecai's " 
fervid desire fades into mere abstract rhetoric. 

Nature and experience were the principal 
sources of George Eliot's inspiration. And 
though she knew a great deal about the Jews, 
her experience had not become sufficiently 
incorporated with her consciousness. Other- 
wise, instead of portraying. such tame models 
of perfection as Deronda and Mirah, she would 
have so mixed her colors as to give us that 
subtle involvement of motive and tendency — 
as of cross-currents in the sea — which we 
find in th'e characters of nature's making and 



DANIEL DERONDA. 26 1 

in her own finest creations, such as Mag- 
gie, Silas Marner, Dorothea ^Casaubon, and 
others. 

In turning to the English portion of the 
story there is at once greater play of sponta- 
neity in the people depicted. Grandcourt, 
Gascoigne, Rex, Mrs. Davilow, Sir Hugh 
Mallinger, and especially Gwendolen, show all 
the old cunning in the psychological render- 
ing of human nature. Curiously enough, this 
novel consists of two perfectly distinct narra- 
tives ; the only point of junction being Daniel 
Deronda himself, who, as a Jew by birth and 
an English gentleman by education, stands 
related to both sets of circumstances. The 
influence he exerts on the spiritual devel- 
opment of Gwendolen seems indeed the true 
motif of the story. Otherwise there is no 
intrinsic connection' between the group of 
people clustering round . Mordecai, and that 
of which Gwendolen is the centre : unless it 
be that the author wished to show the greater 
intensity of aim and higher moral worth of 
the Jews as contrasted with these purpose- 
less, worldly, unideal Christians of the nine- 
teenth century. 

Compared with the immaculate Mirah, 
Gwendolen Harlcth is a very naughty, spoiled, 
imperfect specimen of maidenhood. But she 



262 GEORGE ELIOT. 

has life in her ; and one speculates as to what 
she will say and do next, as if she were a 
person among one's acquaintances. On that 
account most readers of ' Daniel Deronda ' find 
their interest engrossed by the fate of Gwen- 
dolen, and the conjugal relations between her 
and Grandcourt. This is so much the case, 
that one suspects her to have been the first 
idea of the story. She is at any rate its most 
attractive feature. In Gwendolen, George 
Eliot once remarked, she had wished to draw 
a girl of the period. Fascinating, accom- 
plished, of siren-like beauty, she has every 
outward grace combined with a singular in- 
ward vacuity. The deeper aspects of life are 
undreamed of in her philosophy. Her relig- 
ion consists in a vague awe of the unknown 
and invisible, and her ambition in the acquisi- 
tion of rank, wealth, and personal distinction. 
She is selfish, vain, frivolous, worldly, domi- 
neering, yet not without sudden impulses of 
generosity, and jets of affection. Something 
there is in her of Undine before she had a 
soul — something of a gay, vivacious, unfeel- 
ing sprite, who recks nothing of human love 
or of human misery, but looks down with 
utter indifference on the poor humdrum mor- 
tals around her, whom she inspires at once 
with fear and fondness : something, also, of 



DANIEL DERONDA, 263 

the " princess in <exile, who in time of famine 
was to have her breakfast-roll made of the 
finest bolted flour from the seven thin ears of 
wheat, and in a general decampment was to 
have her silver fork kept out of the baggage." 
How this bewitching creature, whose " iri- 
descence of character " makes^ her a psycho- 
logical problem, is gradually brought to ac- 
cept Henleigh Grandcourt, in spite of the 
promise she has given to Lydia Glasher (his 
discarded victim), and her own fleeting pre- 
sentiments, is described with an . analytical 
subtlety unsurpassed in George Eliot*s works. 
So, indeed, is the whole episode of the mar- 
ried life of Grandcourt. This territorial mag- 
nate, who possesses every worldly advantage 
that Gwendolen desired, is worthy, as a study 
of character, to be placed beside that of Ca- 
saubon himself. Gwendolen's girlish type 
of egoism, which loves to be the centre of 
admiration, here meets with that far other 
deadlier form of an " exorbitant egoism," con- 
spicuous for its intense obstinacy and tenacity 
of rule, " in proportion as the varied suscepti- 
bilities of younger years are stripped away." 
This cold, negative nature lies with a kind of 
withering blight on the susceptible Gwendo- 
len. Roused from the complacent dreams of 
girlhood by the realities of her married life, 



264 GEORGE ELIOT, 

shrinking in helpless repulsion from the hus- 
band whom she meant to manage, and who 
holds her as in a vice, the unhappy woman 
has nothing to cling to in this terrible inward 
collapse of her happiness, but the man, who, 
from the first moment when his eye arrests 
hers at the gaming table at Leubronn,be- 
comes, as it were, a conscience visibly incar- 
nate to her. This incident, which is told in 
the first chapter of the novel, recalls a sketch 
by Dante Rossetti, where Mary Magdalene, in 
the flush of joyous life, is held by the Sa- 
viour's gaze, and in a sudden revulsion from 
her old life, breaks away from companions 
that would fain hold her back, with a passion- 
ate movement towards the Man of Sorrow. 
This impressive conception may have uncon- 
sciously suggested a somewhat similar situa- 
tion to the novelist, for that George Eliot was 
acquainted with this drawing is shown by the 
following letter addressed in 1870 to Dante 
Rossetti : 

" I have had time now to dwell on the 
photographs. I am especially grateful to you 
for giving me, the head marked June 1861 : it 
is exquisite. But I am glad to possess every 
one of them. The subject of the Magdalene 
rises in interest for me, the more I look at it. 
I hope you will keep in the picture an equally 



\ 



DANIEL DERONDA^ 26$ 

passionate type for her. Perhaps you will in- 
dulge me with a little talk about the modifi- 
cations you intend to introduce." 

The relation of Deronda to Gwendolen i» 
of a Christlike nature. He is her only moral 
hold in the fearful temptajions that assail 
her now and again under the intolerable 
irritations of her married life, temptations 
which grow more urgent when Grandcourt 
leads his wife captive, after his fashion, in 
a yacht on the Mediterranean. For " the in- 
tensest form of hatred is that rooted in fear, 
which compels to silence, and drives vehe- 
mence into a constructive vindictiveness, an 
imaginary annihilation of the detested object, 
something like the hidden rites of vengeance, 
with which the persecuted have made a dark 
vent for their rage, and soothed their suf- 
fering into dumbness. Such hidden rites 
went on in the secrecy of Gwendolen's mind, 
but not with soothing effect — rather with the 
effect of a struggling terror. Side by side 
with dread of her husband had grown the 
self-dread which urged her to flee from the 
pursuing images wrought by her pent-up 
impulse/' 

The evil wish at last finds fulfilment, the 
murderous thought is outwardly realized. 
And though death is not eventually the re- 



266 GEORGE ELIOT. 

suit of the criminal desire, it yet seems to 
the unhappy wife as if it had a determin- 
ing power in bringing about the catastro- 
phe. But it is precisely this remorse which 
is the redeeming quality of her nature, 
and awakens a new life within her. In 
this quickening of the moral consciousness 
through guilt we are reminded, although 
in a different manner, of a similar process, 
full of pregnant suggestions, described in 
Nathaniel Hawthorne's ' Transformation.' It 
will be remembered that Donatello leads a 
purely instinctive, that is to say animal, exist- 
ence, till the commission of a crime awakens 
the dormant conscience, and a soul is born 
in the throes of anguish and remorse. 

In ' Daniel Deronda ' there is an entire ab- 
sence of that rich, genial humor which seemed 
spontaneously to bubble up and overflow her 
earlier works. Whether George Eliot's con- 
ception of the Jews as a peculiarly serious 
race had any share in bringing about that 
result, it is difficult to say. At any rate, in 
one of her essays she remarks that, ** The 
history and literature of the ancient He- 
brews gives the idea of a people who went 
about their business and pleasure as gravely 
as a society of beavers." Certainly Morde- 
cai, Deronda, and Mirah are preternaturally 



DANIEL DERONDA. 267 

solemn ; even the Cohen family are not pre^- 
sented with any of those comic touches one 
would have looked for in this great humorist ; 
only in the boy Jacob there are gleams of 
drollery such as in this description of him by 
Hans Meyrick : " He treats me with the easi- 
est familiarity, and seems in general to look 
at me as a second-hand Christian commodity, 
likely to come down in price ; remarking on 
my disadvantages with a frankness which 
seems to imply some thoughts of future pur- 
chase. It is pretty, though, to see the change 
in him if Mirah happens to come in. He 
turns child suddenly — his age usually strikes 
one as being like the Israelitish garments in 
the desert, perhaps near forty, yet with an 
air of recent production. 

A certain subdued vein of humor is not 
entirely absent from the portraiture of the 
Meyrick family, a delightful group, who " had 
their little oddities, streaks of eccentricity 
from the mother's - blood as well as the 
father's, their minds being like mediaeval 
houses with unexpected recesses and open- 
ings from this into that, flights of steps, 
and sudden outlooks. But on the whole, 
instead of the old humor, we find in * Daniel 
Deronda' a polished irony and epigrammatic 
sarcasm, which were afterwards still more 



268 GEORGE ELIOT. 

fully developed in the * Impressions of Theo- 
phrastus Such/ 

Soon after the publication of this novel, 
we find the following allusion to it in one 
of George Eliot's letters to Mrs. Bray : " I 
don't know what you refer to in the Jewish 
World. Perhaps the report of Dr. Hermann 
•Adler's lecture on 'Deronda' to the Jewish 
working-men, given in the Times, Prob- 
ably the Dr. Adler whom you saw is Dr. 
Hermann's father, still living as Chief Rabbi. 
I have had some delightful communications 
from Jew« and Jewesses, both at home and 
abroad. Part of the Club scene in ' D. D.,' is 
flying about in the Hebrew tongue through 
the various Hebrew newspapers, which have 
been copying the ' Maga,' in which the trans- 
lation was first sent to me three months ago. 
The Jews naturally are not indifferent to 
themselves." 

This Club scene gave rise at the time to 
quite a controversy. It could not fail to be 
identified with that other club of philosophers 
out at elbows so vividly described by G. H. 
Lewes in the Fortnightly Review of 1866. 
Nor was it possible not to detect an affinity 
between the Jew Cohen, the poor consump- 
tive journeyman watchmaker, with his weak 
voice and his great calm intellect, and Ezra 



DANIEL DERONDA. 269 

Mordecai Cohen, in precisely similar condi- 
tions ; the difference being that the one is 
penetrated by the philosophical idea of Spi- 
nozism, and the other by the political idea of 
reconstituting a Jewish State in Palestine. 
This difference of mental bias, no doubt, 
forms a contrast between the two characters, 
without, however, invalidating the surmise 
that the fictitious enthusiast may have been 
originally suggested by the noble figure of 
the living Jew. Be that as it may, Lewes 
often took the opportunity in conversation 
of "pointing out that no such resemblance 
existed, Cohen being a keen dialectician and 
a highly impressive man, but without any 
specifically Jewish enthusiasm." 

When she undertook ^o write about the 
Jews, George Eliot was deeply versed in He- 
brew literature, ancient and modern. She 
had taught herself Hebrew when translating 
the Leben Jesu, and this knowledge now 
stood her in good stead. She was also famil- 
iar with the splendid utterances of Jehuda- 
ben-Halevy ; with the visionary speculations 
of the Cabbalists, and with the brilliant Jew- 
ish writers of the Hispano-Arabic epoch. 
She had read portions of the Talmud, and 
remarked one day in conversation that Spi- 
noza had really got something from the Cab- 



270 GEORGE EUOT. 

bala. On her friend humbly suggesting that 
by ordinary accounts it appeared to be awful 
nonsense, she said " that it nevertheless con- 
taine'd fine ideas, like Plato and the Old Tes- 
tament, which, however, people took in the 
lump, being accustomed to them," 



CHAPTER XV. 



LAST YEARS. 



* Daniei. De^onda ' is the last great imagina- 
tive work with which George Eliot was des- 
tined to enrich the world. It came out in 
small volumes, the appearance of each fresh 
number being hailed as a literary event. In 
allusion to an author's feeling on the conclu- 
sion of a weighty task, George Eliot remarks 
in one of her letters : "As to the great novel 
which remains to be written, I must tell you 
that I never believe in future books. . . . Al- 
ways after finishing a book I have a period of 
despair that I can never again produce any- 
thing worth giving to the world. The re- 
sponsibility of the writer grows heavier and 
heavier — does it not ? — as the world grows 
older, and the voices of the dead more numer- 
ous. It is difficult to believe, until the germ 
of some new work grows into imperious activ- 
ity within one, that it is possible to make a 
really needed contribution to the poetry of the 
world — I mean possible to one's self to do it' 



2/2 GEORGE ELIOT. 

This singular diffidence, arising from a 
sense of the tremendous responsibility which 
her position entailed, was one of the most 
noticeable characteristics of this great woman, 
and struck every one who came in contact 
with her. Her conscientiousness made her 
even painfully anxious to enter sympatheti- 
cally into the needs of every person who ap- 
proached her, so as to make her speech a 
permanently fruitful influence in her hearer's 
life. Such an interview, for example, as that 
between Goethe and Heine — where the 
younger poet, after thinking all the way what 
fine things to say to Goethe, was so discon- 
certed by the awe-inspiring presence of the 
master, that he could find nothing better to 
say than that the plums on the road-side 
between Jena and Weimar were remarkably 
good — would have been impossible with one 
so eager always to give of her best. 

This deep seriousness of nature made her 
Sunday afternoon receptions, which became 
more and more fashionable as time went on, 
something of a tax to one who preferred the 
intimate converse of a few to that more su- 
perficially brilliant talk which a promiscuous 
gathering brings with it. Among the distin- 
guished visitors to be met more or less fre- 
quently at the Priory may be mentioned Mr. 



LAST YEARS. 273 

Herbert Spencer, Professor Huxley, Mr. Fred- 
eric Hardson, Professor Beesly, Dr. and Mrs. 
Congreve, Madame Bodichon, Lord Houghton, 
M. Tourgudnief, Mr. Ralston, Sir Theodore 
and Lady Martin (better known as Helen 
Faucit), Mr. Burton of the National Gallery, 
Mr. George Howard and his wife, Mr. C. G. 
Leland, Mr. Moncure Conway, Mr. Justin 
McCarthy, Dr. Huefifer, Mr. and Mrs. Buxton 
Forman, Mr. F. Myers, Mr. Sully, Mr. Du 
Maurier, Mr. and Mrs. Mark Pattison, Mn 
and Mrs. Clifford, Lady Castletown and her 
daughters, Mr. and Mrs. Burne Jones, Mr. 
John Everett Millais, Mr. Robert Browning, 
and Mr. Tennyson. 

Persons of celebrity were not the only ones, 
however, that were made welcome at the 
Priory. The liveliest sympathy was shown by 
both host and hostess in many young people 
as yet struggling in obscurity, but in whom 
they delighted to recognize the promise of some 
future excellence. If a young man were pursu- 
ing some original scientific inquiry, or striking 
out a new vein of speculation, in all London 
there was none likely to enter with such zest 
into his ideas as G. H. Lewes. His generous 
appreciation of intellectual gifts is well shown 
in the following lines to Professor W. K. Clif- 
ford : 

18 



274 



GEORGE ELIOT. 



'' Few things have given us more pleasure 
than the intimation in your note that you had 
a fiancee. May she be the central happiness 
and motive force of your career, and, by satis- 
fying the affections, leave your rare intellect 
free to work out its glorious destiny. For, if 
you don't become a glory to your age and time, 
it will be a sin and a shame. Nature doesn't 
often send forth such gifted sons, and when 
she does, Society usually cripples them. 
Nothing but marriage — a happy marriage — 
has seemed to Mrs. Lewes and myself want- 
ing to your future." 

On the Sunday afternoon receptions just 
mentioned, G. H. Lewes acted, so to speak, 
as a social cement. His vivacity, his ready 
tact, the fascination of his manners, diffused 
that general sense of ease and abandon so 
requisite to foster an har;monious flow of con- 
versation. He was inimitable as a raconteur^ 
and Thackeray, TroUope, and Arthur Helps 
were fond of quoting some of the stories 
which he would dramatize in the telling. 
One of the images which, on these occasions, 
recurs oftenest to George Eliot's friends, is 
that of the frail-looking woman who would 
sit with her chair drawn close to the fire, and 
whose winning womanliness of bearing and 
manners struck every one who had the privi^ 



LAST YEARS. 



27s 



lege of an introduction to her. Her long, 
pale face, with its strongly marked features, 
was less rugged in the mature prime of life 
than in youth, the inner meanings of her na- 
ture having worked themselves more and 
more to the surface, the mouth, with its 
benignant suavity of expression, especially 
softening the too prominent under-lip and 
massive jaw. Her abundant hair, untinged 
with gray, whose smooth bands made a kind 
of frame to the face, was covered by a lace or 
muslin cap, with lappets of rich point or Val- 
enciennes lace fastened under her chin. Her 
gray-blue eyes, under noticeable eyelashes, 
expressed the same acute sensitiveness as 
her long, thin, beautifully shaped hands. She 
had a pleasant laugh and smile, her voice 
being low, distinct, and intensely sympathetic 
in quality : it was contralto in singing, but 
she seldom sang or played before more than 
one or two friends. Though her conversation 
was perfectly easy, each sentence was as fin- 
ished, as perfectly formed, as the style of her 
published works. Indeed, she laid great stress 
on the value of correct speaking and clearness 
of enunciation ; and in 'Theophrastus Such' 
she laments " the general ambition to speak 
every language except our mother English, 
which persons ' of style ' are not ashamed of 



2/6 GEORGE ELIOT. 

corrupting with slang, false foreign equiva- 
lents, and a pronunciation that crushes out 
all color from the vowels, and jams them be- 
tween jostling consonants." 

Besides M. D' Albert's Genevese portrait of 
George Eliot, we have a drawing by Mr. Bur- 
ton, and another by Mr. Lawrence, the latter 
taken soon after the publication of ' Adam 
Bede.' In criticising the latter likeness, a 
keen observer of human nature remarked that 
it conveyed no indication of the infinite depth 
of her observant eye, nor of that cold, subtle, 
and unconscious cruelty of expression which 
might occasionally be detected there. George 
Eliot had an unconquerable aversion to her 
likeness being taken : once, however, in i860, 
she was photographed for the sake of her 
''dear sisters" at Rosehill. But she seems 
to have repented of this weakness, for, after 
the lapse of years, she writes : " Mr. Lewes 
has just come to me after reading your letter, 
and says, * For God's sake tell her not to have 
the photograph reproduced ! ' and I had nearly 
forgotten to say that the fading is what I 
dfiesired. I should not like this image to be 
perpetuated. It needs the friendly eyes that 
regret to see it fade, and must not be recalled 
into emphatic black and white for indifferent 
gazers. Pray let it vanish." 



LAST YEARS. 



277 



Those who knew George Eliot were even 
more struck by the force of her entire per- 
sonality than by her writings. Sympathetic, 
witty, or learned in turn, her conversation 
deeply impressed her hearers, being enriched 
by such felicities of expression as : " The best 
lesson of tolerance we have to learn is to tol- 
erate intolerance." In answer to a friend's 
surprise that a clever man should allow him- 
self to be contradicted by a stupid one, without 
dropping down on him, she remarked : " He 
is very liable to drop down as a baked apple 
would." And of a very plain acquaintance 
she said : " He has the most dreadful kind of 
ugliness one can be afflicted with, because it 
takes on the semblance of beauty." 

Poetr)r, music, and art naturally absorbed 
much attention at the Priory. Here Mr. 
Tennyson has been known to read ' Maud ' 
aloud to his friends : Mr. Browning expatiated 
on the most recondite metrical rules ; and 
Rossetti sent presents of poems and photo- 
graphs. In the following unpublished letters 
George Eliot thanks the latter for his valued 
gifts — "We returned only the night before 
last from a two months' journey to the Con- 
tinent, and among the parcels awaiting me I 
found your generous gift. I am very grateful 
to you both as giver and poet. 



278 GEORGE ELIOT. 

" In cutting the leaves, while my head is 
still swimming from the journey, I have not 
resisted the temptation to read many things 
as they ought not to be read — hurriedly. 
But even in this way I have received a 
stronger impression than any fresh poems 
have for a long while given me, that to read 
once is a reason for 'reading again. The son- 
nets towards ' The House of Life ' attract me 
peculiarly. I feel about them as I do about a 
new cahier of music which I have been * try- 
ing' here and there with the delightful con- 
viction that I have a great deal to become 
acquainted with and to like better and better." 
And again, in acknowledgment of some pho- 
tographs : " The ' Hamlet ' seems to me per- 
fectly intelligible, and altogether admirable in 
conception, except in the type of the man's 
head. I feel sure that ' Hamlet ' had a square 
anterior lobe. 

" Mr. Lewes says, this conception of yours 
makes him long to be an actor who has * Ham- 
let' for one of his parts, that he might carry 
out this scene according to your idea. 

" One is always liable to mistake prejudices 
for sufficient inductions, about types of head 
and face, as wjell as about all other things. I 
have some impressions — perhaps only preju- 
dices dependent on the narrowness of my 



LAST YEARS. 279 

experience — about forms of eyebrow and 
their relation to passionate expression. It is 
possible that such a supposed relation has a 
real anatomical basis. But in many particu- 
lars facial expression is like the expression 
of hand-w; 'ting : the relations are too subtle 
and intricate to be detected, and only shallow- 
ness is confident." 

George Eliot read but little contemporary 
fiction, being usually absorbed in the study of 
some particular subject. " For my own spir- 
itual good I need all other sort of reading," 
she says, "more than I need fiction. I know 
nothing of contemporary English novelists 

with the exception of , and a few of *s 

works. My constant groan is that I must 
leave so much of the greatest writing which 
the centuries have sifted for me unread for 
want of time." For the same reason, on be- 
ing recommended by a literary friend to read 
Walt Whitman, she hesitated on the ground 
of his not containing anything spiritually 
needful for her, but, having been induced to 
take him up, she changed her opinion and 
admitted that he did contain what was " good 
for her soul." As to lighter reading, she was 
fond of books of travel, pronouncing " * The 
Voyage of the Challenger ' a splendid book." 
Among foreign novelists she was very partial 



28o GEORGE ELIOT. 

to Henry Gr^ville, and speaks of * Les Kou- 
miassine ' as a pleasant story. 

Persons who were privileged enough to be 
admitted to the intimacy of George Eliot and 
Mr. Lewes could not fail to be impressed by 
the immense admiration which they had for 
one another. Lewes's tenderness, always on 
the watch lest the great writer, with her deli- 
cately poised health, should overtcxert herself, 
had something of doglike fidelity. On the 
other hand, in spite of George Eliot's habitu- 
ally retiring manner, if any one ever engaged 
on the opposite side of an argument to that 
maintained by the brilliant savant^ in taking 
his part, she usually had the best of it, al- 
though in the most gentle and feminine way. 

Although there was entire oneness of feel- 
ing between them, there was no unanimity of 
opinion. George Eliot had the highest re- 
gard for Lewes's opinions, but held to her 
own. One of the chief subjects of difference 
consisted in their attitude towards Chris- 
tianity : whereas he was its uncompromising 
opponent, she had the greatest sympathy 
with its various manifestations from Roman 
Catholic asceticism to Evangelical austerity 
and Methodist fervor. Her reverence for 
every form of worship in which mankind has 
more or less consciously embodied its sense 



LAST YEARS. 28 1 

of the mystery of all "this unintelligible 
world" increased with the years. She was 
deeply penetrated by that tendency pf the 
Positivist spirit which recognizes the bene- 
ficial element in every form of religion, and 
sees the close, nay indissoluble, connection 
between the faith of former generations and 
the ideal of our own. She herself found 
ample scope for the needs and aspirations of 
her spiritual nature in the religion of human- 
ity. As has already been repeatedly pointed 
out, there runs through all her works the 
same persistent teaching of " the Infinite Na- 
ture of Duty." And with Comte she refers 
" the obligations of duty, as well as all sen- 
timents of devotion, to a- concrete object, at 
once ideal and real ; the Human Race, con- 
ceived as a continuous whole, including the 
past, the present, and the future." 

Though George Eliot drew many of her 
ideas of moral cultivation from the doctrines 
of Comte*s Philosophic Positive, she was not 
a Positivist in the strict sense of the word. 
Her mind was far too creative by nature to 
give an unqualified adhesion to such a system 
as Comte's. Indeed, her devotion to the idea 
of mankind, conceived as a collective whole, 
is not so much characteristic of Positivists as 
of the greatest modern minds, minds such as 



282 GEORGE ELIOT, 

Lessing, Bentham, Shelley, Mill, Mazzini, and 
Victor Hugo. Inasmuch as Comte co-ordi- 
nated these ideas into a consistent doctrine, 
George Eliot found herself greatly attracted 
to his system ; and Mr. Beesly, after an 
acquaintance of eighteen years, considered 
himself justified in stating that her powerful 
intellect had accepted the teaching of Au- 
guste Comte, and that she looked forward to 
the reorganization of belief on the lines which 
he had laid down. Still her adherence, like 
that of G. H. Lewes, was only partial, and 
applied mainly to his philosophy, and not to 
his scheme of social policy. She went farther 
than the latter, however, in her concurrence. 
For Mr. Lewes, speaking of the Politique 
Positive in his ' History of Philosophy,' ad- 
mits that his antagonistic attitude had been 
considerably modified on learning from the 
remark of one very dear to him, " to regard 
it as an Utopia, presenting hypotheses rather 
than doctrines — suggestions for future in- 
quiries rather than dogmas for adepts." 

On the whole, although George Eliot did 
not agree with Comte's later theories concern- 
ing the reconstruction of society, she regarded 
them with sympathy " as the efforts of an 
individual to anticipate the work of future 
generations." This sympathy with the gen- 



-^jS 



LAST YEARS, 283 

eral Positivist movement she showed by sub- 
scribing regularly to Positivist objects, espe- 
cially to the fund of the Central Organization 
presided over by M. Laffitte, but she invariably 
refused all membership with the Positivist 
community. In conversation with an old 
and valued friend, she also repeatedly ex- 
pressed her objection to much in Comte's 
later speculations, saying on one occasion, 
" I cannot submit my intellect or my soul to 
the guidance of Comte." The fact is that, 
although George Eliot was greatly influenced 
by the leading Positivist ideas, her mind was 
too original not to work out her own individ- 
ual conception of life. 

What this conception is has been already 
indicated, so far as space would permit, in 
the discussion of her successive works. Per- 
haps in the course of time her moralizing 
analytical tendency encroached too much on 
the purely artistic faculty. Her eminently 
dramatic genius — which enabled her to real- 
ize characters the most varied and opposite 
in type, somewhat in the manner of Shake- 
speare — became hampered by theories and 
abstract views of life. This was especially 
shown in her latest work 'The Impressions 
of Theophrastus Such,' a series of essays 
chiefly satirizing the weaknesses and vanities 



284 GEORGE ELIOT. 

of the literary class. In these unattractive 
"impressions" the wit is often labored, and 
does not play " beneficently round the chang- 
ing facets of egoism, absurdity, and vice, as 
the sunshine over the rippling sea or the 
dewy meadows." Its cutting irony and in- 
cisive ridicule are no longer tempered by the 
humorous laugh, but have the corrosive qual- 
ity of some acrid chemical substance. 

One of the papers, however, that entitled 
* Debasing the Moral Currency,' expresses 
a strongly marked characteristic of George 
Eliot's mind. It is a pithy protest against 
the tendency of the present generation to 
turn the grandest deeds and noblest works 
of art into food for 'laughter. For she hated 
nothing so much aS mockery and ridicule of 
what other people reverenced, often remark- 
ing that those who considered themselves 
freest from superstitious fancies were the 
most intolerant. She carried this feeling to 
such a pitch that she even disliked a book 
like ' Alice in Wonderland ' because it laughed 
at the things which children had had a kind 
of belief in. In censuring this vicious habit 
of burlesquing the things that ought to be 
regarded with awe and admiration, she re- 
marks, "Let a grdedy buffoonery debase all 
historic beauty, majesty, and pathos, and the 



LAST YEARS, 



285 



more you heap up the desecrated symbols, 
the greater will be the lack of the ennobling 
emotions which subdue the tyranny of suffer- 
ing, and make ambition one with virtue." 

* Looking Backward ' is the only paper in 
' Theophrastus Such* quite free from cyni- 
cism. It contains, under a slightly veiled 
form, pathetically tender reminiscences of 
her own early life. This volume, not pub- 
lished till May 1879, was written before the 
incalculable loss which befell George Eliot 
in the autumn of the preceding year. 

After spending the summer of 1878 in the 
pleasant retirement of Witley, Lewes and 
George Eliot returned to London. A severe 
cold taken by Lewes proved the forerunner 
of a serious disorder, and, after a short ill- 
ness, this bright, many-sided, indefatigable 
thinker passed away in his sixty-second year. 
He had frequently said to his friends that the 
most desirable end of a well-spent life was a 
painless death ; and although his own could 
not be called painless, his sufferings were at 
least of short duration. Concerning the suf- 
fering and anguish of her who was left be- 
hind to mourn him, one may most fitly say, 
in her own words, that " for the first sharp 
pangs there is no comfort — whatever good- 
ness may surround us, darkness and silence 



286 GEORGE ELIOT. . 

Still hang about our pain." In her case, also, 
the " clinging companionship with the dead " 
was gradually linked with her living afifec- 
tions, and she found alleviation for her sor- 
row in resuming those habits of continuous 
mental occupation which -had become second 
nature with her. In a letter addressed to a 
friend, who, only a few short months after- 
wards, suffered a like heavy bereavement, 
there breathes the spirit in which George 
Eliot bore her own sorrow: "I understand 
it all. . . .'There is but one refuge — the 
having much to do. You have the mother's 
duties. Not that these can yet make your 
life other than a burden to be patiently borne. 
Nothing can, except the gradual adaptation 
of your soul to the new conditioris. ... It 
is among my most cherished memories that 
I knew your husband, and from the first de- 
lighted in him. . . . All blessing — and even 
the sorrow that is a form of love has a heart 
of blessing — is tenderly wished for you." 

On seeing this lady for the first time after 
their mutual loss, George Eliot asked her 
eagerly: "Do the children help.? Does it 
make any difference } " Some help there was 
for the widowed heart of this sorrowing woman 
in throwing herself, with all her energies, into 
the work which Lewes had left unfinished at 



LAST YEARS. 287 

his death, and preparing it for publication, 
with the help of an expert. Another subject 
which occupied her thoughts at this time, was 
the foundation of the " George Henry Lewes 
Studentship," in order to commemorate the* 
name of one who had done so much to distin- 
guish himself in the varied fields of literature, 
science, and philosophy. The value of the 
studentship is slightly under 200/. a year. 
It is worth noticing that persons of both sexes 
are received as candidates. The object of the 
endowment is to encourage the prosecution 
of original research in physiology, a science 
to whose study Lewes had devoted himself 
most assiduously for many years. Writing of 
this matter to a young lady, one of the Girton 
students, George Eliot says : " I know . . . 
will be gl^d to ,hear also that both in England 
and Germany the type, or scheme, on which 
the studentship is arranged has been regarded 
with satisfaction, as likely to be a useful 
model." 

Amid such preoccupations, and the prepa- 
ration of * Theophrastus Such ' for the press, 
the months passed on, and George Eliot was 
beginning to see her friends again, when one 
day she not only took the woyld, but her inti- 
mate circle by surprise, by her marriage with 
Mr. John Walter Cross, on the 6th of May, 



2SS GEORGE ELIOT. 

1880. The acquaintance with this gentle- 
man, dating from the year 1867, had long 
ago grown into the warmest friendship, and 
his boundless devotion to the great woman 
whose society was to him as his daily bread, 
no doubt induced her to take a step which 
could not fail to startle even those who loved 
her the most. But George Eliot's was a nature 
that needed some one especially to love. And 
though that precious companionship; at once 
stimulating and sympathetic, which she had 
so long enjoyed, was taken from her, she could 
still find comfort during the remainder of her 
life in the love, the appreciation, and the ten- 
der care which were proffered to her by Mr. 
Cross. Unfortunately her life was not des- 
tined to be prolonged. 

Although seeming fairly well at this date, 
George Eliot's health, always delicate, had 
probably received a shock, from which it 
never recovered. Only six months before 
her marriage three eminent medical men 
were attending her for a painful disease. 
However, there seemed still a prospect of 
happiness for her when she and Mr. Cross 
went for a tour in Italy, settling, on their 
return, at her iavorite country house at Wit- 
ley. In the autumn they once more made 
their home in London, at Mr. Cross's town 



LAST YEARS. 289 

house at 4 Cheyne Walk, Chelsea, and Mrs. 
Cross, who was again beginning to receive 
her friends, seemed, to all appearances, well 
and happy, with a prospect of domestic love 
and unimpaired mental activity stretching 
out before her. But it was not to be. On 
Friday, the 17th of December, George Eliot 
attended a representation of the * Agamem- 
non/ in Greek, by Oxford undergraduates, 
and was so stirred by the grand words of her 
favorite iEschylus, that she was contemplat- 
ing a fresh perusal of the Greek dramatists 
with her husband. On the following day she 
went to the Saturday popular concert, and on 
returning home played through some of the 
music she had been hearing. Her fatal cold 
was probably caught on that occasion, for, 
although she received her friends, according 
to custom, on the Sunday afternoon, she felt 
indisposed in the evening, and on the follow- 
ing day an affection of the larynx necessitated 
medical advice. There seemed no cause for 
alarm at first, till on Wednesday it was un- 
expectedly discovered that inflammation had 
arisen in the heart, and that no hope of re- 
covery remained. Before midnight of the 
22nd of December, 1880, George Eliot, who 
died at precisely the same age as Lewes, had 
passed quietly and painlessly away ; and on 

19 



290 



GEORGE ELIOT, 



Christmas Eve the announcement of her 
death was received with general grief. She 
was buried by the side of George Henry 
Lewes, in the cemetery at Highgate. 

George Eliot's career has been habitually 
described as uniform and uneventful. In 
reality nothing is more misleading. On the 
contrary, her life, from its rising to its set- 
ting, describes an astonishingly wide orbit. 
If one turns back in imagination from the 
little Staffordshire village whence her father 
sprang, to the simple rural surroundings of 
her own youth, and traces her history to the' 
moment when a crowd of mourners, consist- 
ing of the most distinguished men and women 
in England, followed her to the grave, one 
cannot help realizing how truly eventful was 
the life of her who now joined in spirit the 

•* Choir invisible 
Of those immortal dead who live again 
In minds made better by their presence : live 
In pulses stirred to generosity, 
In deeds of daring rectitude, in scorn 
For miserable aims that end in self, 
In thoughts sublime that pierce the night like stars. 
And with their mild persistence urge man's search 
To vaster issues." 



Uoivsrsity Press: John Wilton & Son, Cainbri4gt. 



Messrs. ROBERTS BROTHERS' 



LIST OF 

Bio^aphical Publications. 

LATE BIOGRAPHIES. 

THE LIFE OF RICHARD COBDEN. By John Mor- 

ley. I vol. 8vo. Cloth. With Steel Portrait. Price. . $3.00 

" This life has been compared to Trevelvan's * Life of Macaulay.' This is rather, 
we assujne» as an illustration of its expected popularity with readers than on any other 
ground. It is hardly a compliment to place it on a par with the ' Life of Macaulay ' in 
other respects. It is an abler work than the latter; a more important work; a more 
artbtic work. Mr. Trevelyan writes in a certain florid style of composition which 
Mr. Morely does not attempt to follow; but his manner is more terse and vigorous 
than that of Mr. Trevelyan, and his picture of the life and times of Cobden is more 
effective than that made of Macaula^. This book does not aim to be picturesque; 
there is no attempt at fine writing^ in its pages; but it is essentially ajgrnphic presenta- 
tion of its subject. It is always mteresting. There are marks m it of a mind fully 
conscious of the dignity and importance of its subject; and there is a firm grasp 
of all the matenal, and a masterly weaving of it into a lucid and thoroughly life-like 
narrative, that it would be difficult to overpraise. • • • • It is a j^icture of the 
most important era of English politics of the present century, and it is a record of 
one of the most interesting of lives in its personalrelations. It records Eng iish legisla- 
tion for a third of a century; it pictures the inner life- of the man who was the finest 
figure in it. The diaries, the letters, the speeches, the correspondence of Cobden are 
all drawn upon to give the narrative clearness, and make the presentation complete. 
Twice Mr. Cobden visited America, and once he made the tour of Europe. He was 
in constant correspondence with the more liberal men both in our own country and 
abroad. Several of his letters to Charles Sumner are used, either in whole or in party 
in this department of the biography." — Saturday Evening Gazette. 

WILLIAM WORDSWORTH : A Biographical Sketch, 
with Selections from his Writing in Poetry and Prose. 
By A. J. Symington. With Portrait of Wordsworth 
and View of Rydal Mount. 2 vols. i6mo. Cloth. Price, ^2.00 

"Mn Symington quotes in full no less than forty-seven of the almost matchlesf 
SonnetSy which are, in our opinion, the portion of Wordsworth's work which ensuref 
him an undying fame, and wnich must command admiration even from those who have 
but little sympathy with the poet's general teadiing, and who even dislike the great 
mass of his work. Mr. Symington's l)ook will be found an excellent popular guide to 
the study of Wordsworth, and a true picture of one who never <blazed»^the comet of 
a season,' but lived in obscurity, and sowed seed to bear fruit in increasing measure: 
and Mr. Symington, while devoted to his subject, allows his enthusiasm to be guided 
by common sense, and does not rush into extremes." — Manchester Examiner, 

GASPARA STAMPA. By Eugene Benson. With a 
selection from her Sonnets translated by George Fleming, 
author of " Kismet." i8mo. Cloth. Price, ..... $1.00 

"Gaspara Stampa is a name that has lived only in the keeping of choice and well 
furnished minds. Her brief story is told in these pages in a style well fitted to the 
subject, with no superfluity and no poverty of words. She is depicted in the beauty 
of her person and the brilliancy of her mind, as possessed of genius to give her rank 
with Sappho, and endowed, like her, with the perilous gift of love. The fatal grief that 
fell on ner heart, though it sent her to the grave, drew from her the sonnets which 
keep her name alive in literature. * George Fleming*s ' selections are done by her 
into English in a style which preserves the tenderness and the ponion of the origi* 
nala,'* says the Independeni, 



BIOGRAPHICAL PUBLICATIONS. 



ANDREW (JOHN A.) A Memoir of Governor An- 
drew, with Reminiscences. . By Peleg W. Chandler. 
With Illustrations and Portrait i6mo $1.25 

ARNDT (ERNST MORITZ), Life and Adventures of. 
With Preface by J. R. Seeley, M. A. With Portrait. 
Crown 8vo 2.25 

BRASSEY (THOMAS), Life and Labors of. Z805-Z870. 

By Arthur Helps. With Portrait 8vo 2.50 

CHANNING (WILLIAM ELLERY, D. D.). A Cen- 
tenriial Memory. By Charles T. Brooks. With nine 
Illustrations, including Portrait after Gambadella. i6mo. 1.50 

CHANNING (WILLIAM ELLERY, D. D.), Remi- 
niscences of. By Elizabeth P. Peabody. i6mo. • . . 2.00 

COBDEN (RICHARD). The Life of. By John Morley. 

With Portrait 8vo 3.00 

D'ARBLAY (MADAME). The Diary and Letters of 
Madame D'Arblay. Revised and Edited by Sarah 

Chauncey Woolsey. With Portraits. 2 vols. i2mo. . 4.00 

* 

DELANEY (MRS.). The Autobiography and Corres- 
pondence of Mrs. Delaney. Revised from Lady Llan- 
over's Edition, and Edited by Skrah Chauncey Woolsey. 
With Portraits. 2 vols. i2mo, ....•...,. 4.00 

DE MUSSET (ALFRED), The Biography of. From 
the French of Paul de Musset. By Harriet W. Preston. 
Square i2mo. Gilt top 2.00 

DESBORDES-VALMORE (MADAME), Memoirs of. 

By C. A. Sainte-Beuve. i6mo. 1.50 

DE SEVIGNE (MADAME). Letters. Edited by Mrs. 

Sarah J. Hale. With Portrait. i2mo 1.50 

FLETCHER (MRS.), Autobiography of. With Letters 
and other Family Memorials. Edited by the Survivor of 
her Family. Two superb steel-engraved likenesses of Mrs. 
Fletcher at the ages of fifteen and eighty. 8vo. ... 1,50 

FULLER (MARGARET), Memoirs of. By Ralph Waldo 

Emerson, and others. ■ With Portrait. 2 vols. i2mo. . 3.00 



i^d^^B^^ksaBS 



BIOGRAPHICAL PUBLICATIONS. 



GANNETT (EZRA STILES). A Memoir. By his 

son, W. C. Gannett. With Portrait. 8vo 3.00 

GODWIN (WILLIAM); His Friends and Contem- 
poraries. By C. Kegan PauL With Portraits and Illus- 
trations. 2 vols. 8vo. . • 6.00 

JAMESON (ANNA), Memoirs of the Life of. Author 
of "Characteristics ^of Women," etc. By her Niece, 
Gerardine Macpherson. With Portrait. 8vo 2.50 

LAMB (CHARLES). A Memoir. By Barry Cornwall. 

. i6mo 1.50 

MAY (REV. SAMUEL J.), Memoirs of. With a steel- 
engraved Likeness. i6mo 75 

MODERN FRENCHMEN. Five Biographies. By 

P. G. Hamerton. Square i2mo 2.00 

MONTAGU (MARY WORTLEY). Letters. Edited, 

with a Memoir, by Mrs. Sarah J. Hale. i2mo 1.50 

PELLICO (SILVIO). My Prisons. Memoirs of Silvio 
Pellico. With an Introduction by £pes Sargent. i2mo., 
{^2.25; i6mo 1.50 

PORTRAITS OF CELEBRATED WOMEN. By 
C. A. Sainte-Beuve. Translated by H. W. Preston. 
i6mo 1.50 

PROCTER (BRYAN WALLER). [Bany Cornwall.] 
An Autobiographical Fragment, and Biographical Notes, 
with Personal Sketches of Contemporaries, Unpublished 
Lyrics, and Letters of Literary Friends. Edited by Mrs. 
Procter and Coventry Patmore. With Portrait. Square 
i2mo 2.00 

RECAMIER (MADAME). Memoirs and Correspon- 
dence. Translated from the French of Mme. Lenormant, 
by I. M. Luyster. With Portrait. i6mo 1.5c 

RECAMIER (MADAME) and her Friends. By Mme. 

Lenormant. Translated by I. M. Luyster. i6mo. . . . 1.50 

RUSSELL (JOHN, EARL). Recollections and Sug- 
gestions of Public Life, 18x3-1873. 8vo 3.00 



BIOGRAPHICAL PUBLICATIONS. 



SISTER DORA : A Biography. By Margaret Lonsdale. 

With Portrait. i6mo 1.25 

SOMERVILLE (MARY). Personal Recollections from 
Early Life to Old Age. With a selection from her Cor- 
respondence. By her daughter, Martha Somerville. With 
Portrait. 8vo 2.50 

STEIN, LIFE AND TIMES OF; or, Germany and 
Prussia in the Napoleonic Age. By J. R. Seeley, M. A. 
With Portrait and Maps. 2 vols. 8vo 7.50 

SUMNER (CHARLES), Memoir and Letters of. By 
Edward L. Pierce. With two newly engraved Likenesses 
of Sumner. 2 vols. 8vo *'. . doo 

SWETCHINE (MADAME), Life and Letters. Edited 
by Count de Falloux. Translated by H. W. Preston. 
i6mo 1.50 

SWETCHINE (MADAME), Writings. Edited by 

Count de Falloux. Translated by H. W. Preston. i6mo. 1.25 

THOREAU: The Poet Naturalist. By William Ellery 

Channing. i6mo . .' 1.50 

THORVALDSEN : His Life and Works. By Eugene 

Plon. 8vo. Fully Illustrated. Bevelled boards, gilt top. 4.00 

TURNER (J. M. W.), The Life of. By P. G. Hamer- 

ton.. Square i2mo 2.00 

WORDSWORTH (WILLIAM). A Biographical 

Sketch, with Selections from his Writings in Poetry and 
Prose. By A.- J. Symington. With Portrait of Words- 
worth and view of Rydal Mount. 2 vols. i6mo. . . . 2.00 

WOLLSTONECRAFT (MARY), Letters to Imfay, 
with Prefatory Memoir by C. Kegan PauL Two Portraits 
after Opie. i2mo •. •. . 2.00 



These books are all neatly bound in cloth, and are especially 
adapted f<yr Libraries. Mailed post-paid, on receipt qf price, by 
the publish&rst Roberts Brothers^ Boston, 






i 
